.\"
.\" This file and its contents are supplied under the terms of the
.\" Common Development and Distribution License ("CDDL"), version 1.0.
.\" You may only use this file in accordance with the terms of version
.\" 1.0 of the CDDL.
.\"
.\" A full copy of the text of the CDDL should have accompanied this
.\" source.  A copy of the CDDL is also available via the Internet at
.\" http://www.illumos.org/license/CDDL.
.\"
.\"
.\" Copyright 2024 Oxide Computer Company
.\"
.Dd June 26, 2024
.Dt LIBIPCC_ROT 3IPCC
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm libipcc_rot ,
.Nm libipcc_rot_buf ,
.Nm libipcc_rot_free
.Nd Communicate with the system Root of Trust
.Sh LIBRARY
.Lb libipcc
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.In libipcc.h
.Ft bool
.Fo libipcc_rot
.Fa "libipcc_handle_t *handle"
.Fa "uint8_t *buf"
.Fa "size_t len"
.Fa "libipcc_rot_t **rotp"
.Fc
.Ft "uint8_t *"
.Fo libipcc_rot_buf
.Fa "libipcc_rot_t *rot"
.Fa "size_t *lenp"
.Fc
.Ft void
.Fo libipcc_rot_free
.Fa "libipcc_rot_t *rot"
.Fc
.Sh DESCRIPTION
This function enables communication with the Root Of Trust
.Pq RoT
within Oxide hardware.
The message format is a private contract between the consumer and the RoT and
is opaque to libipcc.
.Pp
A
.Sy rot handle
is retrieved via a call to
.Fn libipcc_rot ,
passing in a libipcc
.Fa handle
obtained via a call to
.Xr libipcc_init 3IPCC ,
and then that
.Sy rot handle
can be interrogated to retrieve the response from the RoT.
.Fa buf
must point to a buffer containing the message to be transmitted, with the length
of the message being passed in via
.Fa len .
When finished with, the
.Sy rot handle
should be freed via a call to
.Fn libipcc_rot_free .
.Pp
.Fn libipcc_rot_buf
returns a pointer to the reply data received from the RoT, and updates its
.Fa lenp
parameter with the length of that data.
.Pp
Note that the
.Sy rot handle
lifetime is separate to that of the
.Vt "libipcc_handle_t *" .
That is, the
.Sy rot handle
may continue to be used after the library handle is closed via a call to
.Xr libipcc_fini 3IPCC
as shown in the example below.
.Sh RETURN VALUES
Upon successful completion,
.Fn libipcc_rot
returns
.Dv true
and
.Fa rotp
is updated to point to a newly allocated
.Sy rot handle .
Otherwise,
.Dv false
is returned and the libipcc handle will contain details of the reason for the
failure which can be retrieved by interrogating the handle using the functions
described in
.Xr libipcc_err 3IPCC .
.Pp
.Fn libipcc_rot_buf
always succeeds and returns the data received from the RoT.
.Sh EXAMPLES
.Sy Example 1
Send a message to the RoT and print the response length
.Pp
The following example shows how to send a message to the RoT.
.Bd -literal -offset 2
#include <inttypes.h>
#include <err.h>
#include <libipcc.h>

int
main(void)
{
	char errmsg[LIBIPCC_ERR_LEN];
	libipcc_handle_t *lih;
	libipcc_rot_t *rot;
	libipcc_err_t lerr;
	uint8_t *buf;
	size_t len;
	int32_t serr;

	if (!libipcc_init(&lih, &lerr, &serr, errmsg, sizeof (errmsg))) {
		errx(EXIT_FAILURE, "libipcc error: '%s' (%s / %s)",
		    errmsg, libipcc_strerror(lerr), strerror(serr));
	}

	buf = "test message";
	len = strlen(buf) + 1;

	if (!libipcc_rot(lih, buf, len, &rot)) {
		libipcc_err_t lerr = libipcc_err(lih);

		errx(EXIT_FAILURE, "libipcc error: '%s' (0x%x %s / %s)",
		    libipcc_errmsg(lih),
		    lerr, libipcc_strerror(lerr),
		    strerror(libipcc_syserr(lih)));
	}

	libipcc_fini(lih);

	buf = libipcc_rot_buf(rot, &len);
	(void) printf("RoT replied with 0x%zx bytes", len);
	libipcc_rot_free(rot);
}
.Ed
.Sh ERRORS
When the functions defined in this page return
.Dv false ,
the reason for the failure can be determined from the library handle
via the functions defined in
.Xr libipcc_err 3IPCC .
.Sh INTERFACE STABILITY
.Sy Private
The interfaces in this library are designed for use by Oxide software.
.Sh MT-LEVEL
See
.Sy LOCKING
in
.Xr libipcc 3IPCC .
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr libipcc_err 3IPCC ,
.Xr libipcc_init 3IPCC ,
.Xr libipcc 3LIB
