.\"
.\" Sun Microsystems, Inc. gratefully acknowledges The Open Group for
.\" permission to reproduce portions of its copyrighted documentation.
.\" Original documentation from The Open Group can be obtained online at
.\" http://www.opengroup.org/bookstore/.
.\"
.\" The Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers and The Open
.\" Group, have given us permission to reprint portions of their
.\" documentation.
.\"
.\" In the following statement, the phrase ``this text'' refers to portions
.\" of the system documentation.
.\"
.\" Portions of this text are reprinted and reproduced in electronic form
.\" in the SunOS Reference Manual, from IEEE Std 1003.1, 2004 Edition,
.\" Standard for Information Technology -- Portable Operating System
.\" Interface (POSIX), The Open Group Base Specifications Issue 6,
.\" Copyright (C) 2001-2004 by the Institute of Electrical and Electronics
.\" Engineers, Inc and The Open Group.  In the event of any discrepancy
.\" between these versions and the original IEEE and The Open Group
.\" Standard, the original IEEE and The Open Group Standard is the referee
.\" document.  The original Standard can be obtained online at
.\" http://www.opengroup.org/unix/online.html.
.\"
.\" This notice shall appear on any product containing this material.
.\"
.\" The contents of this file are subject to the terms of the
.\" Common Development and Distribution License (the "License").
.\" You may not use this file except in compliance with the License.
.\"
.\" You can obtain a copy of the license at usr/src/OPENSOLARIS.LICENSE
.\" or http://www.opensolaris.org/os/licensing.
.\" See the License for the specific language governing permissions
.\" and limitations under the License.
.\"
.\" When distributing Covered Code, include this CDDL HEADER in each
.\" file and include the License file at usr/src/OPENSOLARIS.LICENSE.
.\" If applicable, add the following below this CDDL HEADER, with the
.\" fields enclosed by brackets "[]" replaced with your own identifying
.\" information: Portions Copyright [yyyy] [name of copyright owner]
.\"
.\"
.\" Copyright 1989 AT&T
.\" Portions Copyright (c) 1992, X/Open Company Limited All Rights Reserved
.\" Portions Copyright (c) 1982-2007 AT&T Knowledge Ventures
.\" Copyright (c) 2008, Sun Microsystems, Inc. All Rights Reserved
.\" Portions Copyright 2021 OmniOS Community Edition (OmniOSce) Association.
.\"
.Dd Feb 9, 2021
.Dt CD 1
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm cd ,
.Nm chdir ,
.Nm pushd ,
.Nm popd ,
.Nm dirs
.Nd change working directory
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Nm /usr/bin/cd
.Op Ar directory
.Ss ksh93
.Nm cd
.Op Fl L
.Op Fl P
.Op Ar arg
.Nm cd Ar old new
.Nm cd Fl
.Ss csh
.Nm cd Op Ar dir
.Nm chdir Op Ar dir
.Nm pushd Op Sy + Ns Ar n | Ar dir
.Nm popd Op Sy + Ns Ar n
.Nm dirs Op Fl l
.Sh DESCRIPTION
.Ss /usr/bin/cd
The
.Nm /usr/bin/cd
utility changes the current directory in the context of
the
.Nm
utility only.
This is in contrast to the version built into the shell.
.Nm /usr/bin/cd
has no effect on the invoking process but can be used to determine whether or
not a given directory can be set as the current directory.
.Ss ksh93
The Korn shell built-in
.Nm
command can be in either of two forms.
In the first form it changes the current directory to
.Ar arg .
If
.Ar arg
is
.Fl ,
the directory is changed to the previous directory.
The shell variable
.Ev HOME
is the default
.Ar arg .
The environment variable
.Ev PWD
is set to the current directory.
If the
.Ev PWD
is changed, the
.Ev OLDPWD
environment variable shall also be changed to the value of the old working
directory, that is, the current working directory immediately prior to the call
to change directory
.Pq Nm .
The shell variable
.Ev CDPATH
defines the search path for the directory containing
.Ar arg .
Alternative directory names are separated by a colon
.Po
.Sy :
.Pc .
The default path is
.Dv null
(specifying the current directory).
The current directory is specified by a null path name, which can appear
immediately after the equal sign or between the colon delimiters anywhere else
in the path list.
If
.Ar arg
begins with a
.Sq Sy / ,
.Sq Sy \&. ,
or
.Sq Sy \&.. ,
then the search path is not used.
Otherwise, each directory in the path is searched for
.Ar arg .
If unsuccessful,
.Nm
attempts to change directories to the pathname formed by the concatenation of
the value of PWD, a slash character, and
.Bl -tag -width Ar
.It Fl L
Handles the operation dot-dot
.Pq Sy \&..
logically.
Symbolic link components are
.Em not
resolved before dot-dot components are processed.
.It Fl P
Handles the operand dot-dot physically.
Symbolic link components
.Em are
resolved before dot-dot components are processed.
.El
.Pp
If both
.Fl L
and
.Fl P
options are specified, the last option to be invoked is used and the other is
ignored.
If neither
.Fl L
nor
.Fl P
are specified, the dot-dot operand is handled logically.
.Pp
The second form of
.Nm
substitutes the string
.Ar new
for the string
.Ar old
in the current directory name,
.Ev PWD
and tries to change to this new directory.
.Pp
The
.Nm
command cannot be executed by
.Sy rksh
because a new process is created to execute each command.
.Nm
would be ineffective if it were written as a normal command; therefore, it is
recognized by and is internal to the Korn shell.
.Po See
.Xr pwd 1 ,
.Xr ksh93 1 ,
and
.Xr chdir 2
.Pc .
.Ss csh
If
.Ar dir
is not specified, the C shell built-in
.Nm
uses the value of shell parameter
.Sy HOME
as the new working directory.
If
.Ar dir
specifies a complete path starting with
.Sq Sy / ,
.Sq Sy \&. ,
or
.Sq Sy \&.. ,
.Ar dir
becomes the new working directory.
If neither case applies,
.Nm
tries to find the designated directory relative to one of the paths specified
by the
.Ev CDPATH
shell variable.
.Ev CDPATH
has the same syntax as, and similar semantics to, the
.Sy PATH
shell variable.
.Nm
must have execute (search) permission in
.Ar dir .
Since a new process is created to execute each command,
.Nm
would be ineffective if it were written as a normal command; therefore, it is
recognized by and is internal to the C-shell.
.Po See
.Xr pwd 1 ,
.Xr sh 1 ,
and
.Xr chdir 2
.Pc .
.Pp
.Nm chdir
changes the shell's working directory to directory
.Ar dir .
If no argument is given, change to the home directory of the user.
If
.Ar dir
is a relative pathname not found in the current directory, check for it in
those directories listed in the
.Sy cdpath
variable.
If
.Ar dir
is the name of a shell variable whose value starts with a
.Sy / ,
change to the directory named by that value.
.Pp
.Nm pushd
pushes a directory onto the directory stack.
With no arguments, exchange the top two elements.
.Bl -tag -width Ar -offset indent
.It Sy + Ns Ar n
Rotate the
.Ar n Ns No 'th
entry to the top of the stack and
.Nm
to it.
.It Ar dir
Push the current working directory onto the stack and change to
.Ar dir .
.El
.Pp
.Nm popd
pops the directory stack and changes directory to the new top directory.
The elements of the directory stack are numbered from 0 starting at the top.
.Bl -tag -width Ar -offset indent
.It Sy + Ns Ar n
Discard the
.Ar n Ns No 'th
entry in the stack.
.El
.Pp
.Nm dirs
prints the directory stack, most recent to the left; the first
directory shown is the current directory.
With the
.Fl l
argument, produce
an unabbreviated printout; use of the
.Sy ~
notation is suppressed.
.Sh OPERANDS
The following operands are supported:
.Bl -tag -width Ar
.It Ar directory
An absolute or relative pathname of the directory that becomes the new working
directory.
The interpretation of a relative pathname by
.Nm
depends on the
.Ev CDPATH
environment variable.
.El
.Sh EXIT STATUS
The following exit values are returned:
.Bl -tag -width Ds
.It Sy 0
The directory was successfully changed.
.It Sy >0
An error occurred.
.El
.Sh ENVIRONMENT VARIABLES
See
.Xr environ 5
for descriptions of the following environment variables
that affect the execution of
.Nm :
.Ev LANG ,
.Ev LC_ALL ,
.Ev LC_CTYPE ,
.Ev LC_MESSAGES ,
and
.Ev NLSPATH .
.Bl -tag -width Ds
.It Ev CDPATH
A colon-separated list of pathnames that refer to directories.
If the
.Ar directory
operand does not begin with a slash
.Pq Sy /
character, and the first component is not dot or dot-dot,
.Nm
searches for
.Ar directory
relative to each directory named in the
.Ev CDPATH
variable,
in the order listed.
The new working directory is set to the first matching directory found.
An empty string in place of a directory pathname represents the current
directory.
If
.Ev CDPATH
is not set, it is treated as if it were an empty string.
.It Ev HOME
The name of the home directory, used when no
.Ar directory
operand is specified.
.It Ev OLDPWD
A pathname of the previous working directory, used by ksh93's
.Nm Fl .
.It Ev PWD
A pathname of the current working directory, set by
.Nm
after it has changed to that directory.
.El
.Sh INTERFACE STABILITY
The command line interface of
.Nm
is
.Sy Committed .
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr csh 1 ,
.Xr ksh93 1 ,
.Xr pwd 1 ,
.Xr chdir 2 ,
.Xr attributes 5 ,
.Xr environ 5 ,
.Xr standards 5
