.\"
.\" Sun Microsystems, Inc. gratefully acknowledges The Open Group for
.\" permission to reproduce portions of its copyrighted documentation.
.\" Original documentation from The Open Group can be obtained online at
.\" http://www.opengroup.org/bookstore/.
.\"
.\" The Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers and The Open
.\" Group, have given us permission to reprint portions of their
.\" documentation.
.\"
.\" In the following statement, the phrase ``this text'' refers to portions
.\" of the system documentation.
.\"
.\" Portions of this text are reprinted and reproduced in electronic form
.\" in the SunOS Reference Manual, from IEEE Std 1003.1, 2004 Edition,
.\" Standard for Information Technology -- Portable Operating System
.\" Interface (POSIX), The Open Group Base Specifications Issue 6,
.\" Copyright (C) 2001-2004 by the Institute of Electrical and Electronics
.\" Engineers, Inc and The Open Group.  In the event of any discrepancy
.\" between these versions and the original IEEE and The Open Group
.\" Standard, the original IEEE and The Open Group Standard is the referee
.\" document.  The original Standard can be obtained online at
.\" http://www.opengroup.org/unix/online.html.
.\"
.\" This notice shall appear on any product containing this material.
.\"
.\" The contents of this file are subject to the terms of the
.\" Common Development and Distribution License (the "License").
.\" You may not use this file except in compliance with the License.
.\"
.\" You can obtain a copy of the license at usr/src/OPENSOLARIS.LICENSE
.\" or http://www.opensolaris.org/os/licensing.
.\" See the License for the specific language governing permissions
.\" and limitations under the License.
.\"
.\" When distributing Covered Code, include this CDDL HEADER in each
.\" file and include the License file at usr/src/OPENSOLARIS.LICENSE.
.\" If applicable, add the following below this CDDL HEADER, with the
.\" fields enclosed by brackets "[]" replaced with your own identifying
.\" information: Portions Copyright [yyyy] [name of copyright owner]
.\"
.\"
.\" Copyright (c) 1992, X/Open Company Limited.  All Rights Reserved.
.\" Portions Copyright (c) 2006, Sun Microsystems, Inc. All Rights Reserved
.\" Portions Copyright 2021 OmniOS Community Edition (OmniOSce) Association.
.\"
.Dd Feb 9, 2021
.Dt CKSUM 1
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm cksum
.Nd write file checksums and sizes
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Nm
.Oo Ar file Oc Ns ...
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The
.Nm
command calculates and writes to standard output a cyclic redundancy check
(CRC) for each input file, and also writes to standard output the number of
octets in each file.
.Pp
For each file processed successfully,
.Nm
will write in the following
format:
.Bd -ragged -offset indent
.Dq Sy %u %d %s\\en
.Aq checksum ,
.Aq num of octets ,
.Aq path name
.Ed
.Pp
If no
.Ar file
operand was specified, the path name and its leading space will be omitted.
.Pp
The CRC used is based on the polynomial used for CRC error checking in the
referenced Ethernet standard.
.Pp
The encoding for the CRC checksum is defined by the generating polynomial:
.Bd -literal -offset indent
G(x) = x^32 +  x^26 + x^23 + x^22 + x^16 + x^12 + x^11 + x^10 +
       x^8 + x^7 + x^5 + x^4 + x^2 + x + 1
.Ed
.Pp
Mathematically, the CRC value corresponding to a given file is defined by the
following procedure:
.Bl -enum -offset indent
.It
The
.Ar n
bits to be evaluated are considered to be the coefficients of a
mod 2 polynomial
.Em M Ns ( x )
of degree
.Em n Ns \- Ns 1 .
These
.Em n
bits are the bits from the file, with the most significant bit being the most
significant bit of the first octet of the file and the last bit being the least
significant bit of the last octet, padded with zero bits (if necessary) to
achieve an integral number of octets, followed by one or more octets
representing the length of the file as a binary value, least significant octet
first.
The smallest number of octets capable of representing this integer is used.
.It
.Em M Ns ( Em x )
is multiplied by
.Em x Ns ^ Ns 32
(that is, shifted left 32 bits) and divided by
.Em G Ns ( Em x )
using mod 2 division, producing a remainder
.Em R Ns ( Em x )
of degree \(<= 31.
.It
The coefficients of
.Em R Ns ( Em x )
are considered to be a 32-bit sequence.
.It
The bit sequence is complemented and the result is the CRC.
.El
.Sh OPERANDS
The following operands are supported:
.Bl -tag -width Ar
.It Ar file
A path name of a file to be checked.
If no
.Ar file
operands are specified, the standard input is used.
.El
.Sh EXIT STATUS
The following exit values are returned:
.Bl -tag -width Ds
.It Sy 0
All input files were successfully processed.
.It Sy >0
An error occurred.
.El
.Sh ENVIRONMENT VARIABLES
See
.Xr environ 5
for descriptions of the following environment variables
that affect the execution of
.Nm :
.Ev LANG ,
.Ev LC_ALL ,
.Ev LC_CTYPE ,
.Ev LC_MESSAGES ,
and
.Ev NLSPATH .
.Sh INTERFACE STABILITY
The command line interface of
.Nm
is
.Sy Committed .
The output of
.Nm
is
.Sy Committed .
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr digest 1 ,
.Xr sum 1 ,
.Xr bart 1M ,
.Xr attributes 5 ,
.Xr environ 5 ,
.Xr largefile 5 ,
.Xr standards 5
