.\" Sun Microsystems, Inc. gratefully acknowledges The Open Group for
.\" permission to reproduce portions of its copyrighted documentation.
.\" Original documentation from The Open Group can be obtained online at
.\" http://www.opengroup.org/bookstore/.
.\"
.\" The Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers and The Open
.\" Group, have given us permission to reprint portions of their
.\" documentation.
.\"
.\" In the following statement, the phrase ``this text'' refers to portions
.\" of the system documentation.
.\"
.\" Portions of this text are reprinted and reproduced in electronic form
.\" in the SunOS Reference Manual, from IEEE Std 1003.1, 2004 Edition,
.\" Standard for Information Technology -- Portable Operating System
.\" Interface (POSIX), The Open Group Base Specifications Issue 6,
.\" Copyright (C) 2001-2004 by the Institute of Electrical and Electronics
.\" Engineers, Inc and The Open Group.  In the event of any discrepancy
.\" between these versions and the original IEEE and The Open Group
.\" Standard, the original IEEE and The Open Group Standard is the referee
.\" document.  The original Standard can be obtained online at
.\" http://www.opengroup.org/unix/online.html.
.\"
.\" This notice shall appear on any product containing this material.
.\"
.\" The contents of this file are subject to the terms of the
.\" Common Development and Distribution License (the "License").
.\" You may not use this file except in compliance with the License.
.\"
.\" You can obtain a copy of the license at usr/src/OPENSOLARIS.LICENSE
.\" or http://www.opensolaris.org/os/licensing.
.\" See the License for the specific language governing permissions
.\" and limitations under the License.
.\"
.\" When distributing Covered Code, include this CDDL HEADER in each
.\" file and include the License file at usr/src/OPENSOLARIS.LICENSE.
.\" If applicable, add the following below this CDDL HEADER, with the
.\" fields enclosed by brackets "[]" replaced with your own identifying
.\" information: Portions Copyright [yyyy] [name of copyright owner]
.\"
.\"
.\" Copyright 1989 AT&T
.\" Portions Copyright (c) 1992, X/Open Company Limited  All Rights Reserved
.\" Copyright (c) 2006, Sun Microsystems, Inc.  All Rights Reserved.
.\" Copyright 2021 OmniOS Community Edition (OmniOSce) Association.
.\"
.Dd Feb 9, 2021
.Dt CMP 1
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm cmp
.Nd compare two files
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Nm
.Op Fl bcdilns
.Ar file1 file2
.Op Ar skip1 Op Ar skip2
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The
.Nm
utility compares two files.
.Nm
writes no output if the files are the same.
Under default options, if they differ, it writes to standard output the byte
and line numbers at which the first difference occurred.
Bytes and lines are numbered beginning with 1.
.Ar skip1
and
.Ar skip2
are initial byte offsets into
.Ar file1
and
.Ar file2
respectively, and are specified in bytes or can be given with a suffix of
.Cm k
for kilobytes or
.Cm m
for megabytes.
.Lp
If either
.Ar file1
or
.Ar file2
is a dash
.Pq Sy \- ,
.Nm
uses standard input starting at the current location.
.Sh OPTIONS
The following options are supported:
.Bl -tag -width Ar
.It Fl b Ns \&, Fl \-print-bytes
Print differing bytes as 3-digit octal values.
.It Fl c Ns \&, Fl \-print-chars
Print differing bytes as follows:
.Bl -bullet -width Ds
.It
non-space printable characters as themselves;
.It
space and control characters as
.Em ^
followed by a letter of the alphabet;
.It
characters with the high bit set as the lower 7-bit character prefixed by
.Em M^
for 7-bit space and non-printable characters, and
.Em M-
for all other characters.
If the 7-bit character encoding is not ASCII then the characters are converted
to ASCII to determine whether the high bit is set and, if set, it is cleared
and converted back to the native encoding.
Multibyte characters in the current locale are treated as printable characters.
.El
.It Fl d Ar differences Ns \&, Fl \-differences Ns = Ns Ar differences
Print at most
.Ar differences
differences using
.Fl l
.Pq Fl -verbose
output format.
If
.Ar differences
is
.Cm 0
then this is equivalent to passing the
.Fl s
or
.Fl \-silent
option.
.It Fl i Ar skip1 Ns Op : Ns Ar skip2 Ns \&, Fl -skip Ns = Ns Ar skip1 Ns Op : Ns Ar skip2 Ns \&, Fl -ignore-initial Ns = Ns Ar skip1 Ns Op : Ns Ar skip2
Skip the first
.Ar skip1
bytes in
.Ar file1
and the first
.Ar skip2
bytes in
.Ar file2 .
If
.Ar skip2
is omitted then
.Ar skip1
is used for that value.
The default value is
.Ar 0:0 .
.It Fl l Ns \&, Fl \-verbose
Write the byte number (decimal) and the differing bytes (octal) for each
difference.
.It Fl n Ar count Ns \&, Fl \-count Ns = Ns Ar count Ns \&, Fl \-bytes Ns = Ns Ar count
Compare at most
.Ar count
bytes.
.It Fl s Ns \&, Fl \-silent \&, Fl \-quiet
Write nothing for differing files.
Return exit status only.
.El
.Sh OPERANDS
The following operands are supported:
.Bl -tag -width Ar
.It Ar file1
A path name of the first file to be compared.
If
.Ar file1
is
.Sy \- ,
the standard input is used.
.It Ar file2
A path name of the second file to be compared.
If
.Ar file2
is
.Sy \- ,
the standard input is used.
.It Ar skip1
The number of initial bytes from
.Ar file1
to skip before beginning the comparison.
.It Ar skip2
The number of initial bytes from
.Ar file2
to skip before beginning the comparison.
If
.Ar skip1
is specified but
.Ar skip2
is not, then the value of
.Ar skip1
is also implicitly used for
.Ar skip2 .
.El
.Pp
If both
.Ar file1
and
.Ar file2
refer to standard input or refer to the same FIFO, block or character special
file, an error results.
.Pp
.Ar skip
values are specified in bytes, or can be suffixed with
.Cm k
.Pq for kilobytes
or
.Cm m
.Pq for megabytes.
.Sh EXIT STATUS
The following exit values are returned:
.Bl -tag -width Ds
.It Sy 0
The files or portions compared are identical.
.It Sy 1
The files or portions compared are different.
.It Sy >1
An error ocurred.
.El
.Sh EXAMPLES
.Bl -tag -width Ds
.It Sy Example 1 No Comparing Files Byte for Byte
The following example does a byte for byte comparison of
.Ar file1
and
.Ar file2 ,
skipping the first 1024 bytes in
.Ar file2
before starting the comparison.
.Bd -literal
$ cmp file1 file2 0 1024
.Ed
.El
.Sh ENVIRONMENT VARIABLES
See
.Xr environ 5
for descriptions of the following environment variables
that affect the execution of
.Nm :
.Ev LANG ,
.Ev LC_ALL ,
.Ev LC_TYPE ,
.Ev LC_MESSAGES ,
.Ev LC_NUMERIC ,
and
.Ev NLSPATH .
.Sh INTERFACE STABILITY
The command line interface of
.Nm
is
.Sy Committed .
The output of
.Nm
is
.Sy Standard .
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr comm 1 ,
.Xr diff 1 ,
.Xr attributes 5 ,
.Xr environ 5 ,
.Xr largefile 5 ,
.Xr standards 5
