.\"
.\" Sun Microsystems, Inc. gratefully acknowledges The Open Group for
.\" permission to reproduce portions of its copyrighted documentation.
.\" Original documentation from The Open Group can be obtained online at
.\" http://www.opengroup.org/bookstore/.
.\"
.\" The Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers and The Open
.\" Group, have given us permission to reprint portions of their
.\" documentation.
.\"
.\" In the following statement, the phrase ``this text'' refers to portions
.\" of the system documentation.
.\"
.\" Portions of this text are reprinted and reproduced in electronic form
.\" in the SunOS Reference Manual, from IEEE Std 1003.1, 2004 Edition,
.\" Standard for Information Technology -- Portable Operating System
.\" Interface (POSIX), The Open Group Base Specifications Issue 6,
.\" Copyright (C) 2001-2004 by the Institute of Electrical and Electronics
.\" Engineers, Inc and The Open Group.  In the event of any discrepancy
.\" between these versions and the original IEEE and The Open Group
.\" Standard, the original IEEE and The Open Group Standard is the referee
.\" document.  The original Standard can be obtained online at
.\" http://www.opengroup.org/unix/online.html.
.\"
.\" This notice shall appear on any product containing this material.
.\"
.\" The contents of this file are subject to the terms of the
.\" Common Development and Distribution License (the "License").
.\" You may not use this file except in compliance with the License.
.\"
.\" You can obtain a copy of the license at usr/src/OPENSOLARIS.LICENSE
.\" or http://www.opensolaris.org/os/licensing.
.\" See the License for the specific language governing permissions
.\" and limitations under the License.
.\"
.\" When distributing Covered Code, include this CDDL HEADER in each
.\" file and include the License file at usr/src/OPENSOLARIS.LICENSE.
.\" If applicable, add the following below this CDDL HEADER, with the
.\" fields enclosed by brackets "[]" replaced with your own identifying
.\" information: Portions Copyright [yyyy] [name of copyright owner]
.\"
.\"
.\" Copyright 1989 AT&T
.\" Portions Copyright (c) 1992, X/Open Company Limited.  All Rights Reserved.
.\" Copyright (c) 2004, Sun Microsystems, Inc.  All Rights Reserved.
.\" Copyright 2021 OmniOS Community Edition (OmniOSce) Association.
.Dd Feb 9, 2021
.Dt COMM 1
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm comm
.Nd select or reject lines common to two files
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Nm
.Op Fl 123
.Ar file1 file2
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The
.Nm
utility reads
.Ar file1
and
.Ar file2 ,
which must be ordered in the current collating sequence, and produces three
text columns as output:
.Bl -bullet -offset Ds
.It
lines only in
.Ar file1 ;
.It
lines only in
.Ar file2 ;
.It
lines in both files.
.El
.Pp
If the input files were ordered according to the collating sequence of the
current locale, the lines written will be in the collating sequence of the
original lines.
If not, the results are unspecified.
.Pp
If either
.Ar file1
or
.Ar file2
is
.Sy \- ,
.Nm
uses standard input starting at the current location.
.Sh OPTIONS
The following options are supported:
.Bl -tag -width Ar
.It Fl 1
Suppresses the output column of lines unique to
.Ar file1 .
.It Fl 2
Suppresses the output column of lines unique to
.Ar file2 .
.It Fl 3
Suppresses the output column of lines common to both
.Ar file1
and
.Ar file2 .
.El
.Sh OPERANDS
The following operands are supported:
.Bl -tag -width Ar
.It Ar file1
A path name of the first file to be compared.
If
.Ar file1
is
.Sy \- ,
the standard input is used.
.It Ar file2
A path name of the second file to be compared.
If
.Ar file1
is
.Sy \- ,
the standard input is used.
.El
.Sh EXIT STATUS
The following exit values are returned:
.Bl -tag -width Ds
.It Sy 0
All input files were successfully output as specified.
.It Sy >0
An error occurred.
.El
.Sh EXAMPLES
.Bl -tag -width 6
.It Sy Example 1 No Printing a list of utilities specified by files
.Pp
If
.Ar file1 ,
.Ar file2 ,
and
.Ar file3
each contain a sorted list of utilities, the command
.Bd -literal
    $ comm -23 file1 file2  | comm -23 - file3
.Ed
.Pp
prints a list of utilities in
.Ar file1
not specified by either of the other files.
.Pp
The command:
.Bd -literal
    $ comm -12 file1 file2 | comm -12 - file3
.Ed
.Pp
prints a list of utilities specified by all three files; and the command:
.Bd -literal
    $ comm -12  file2 file3 | comm -23 -file1
.Ed
.Pp
prints a list of utilities specified by both
.Ar file2
and
.Ar file3 ,
but not specified in
.Ar file1 .
.El
.Sh ENVIRONMENT VARIABLES
See
.Xr environ 5
for descriptions of the following environment variables
that affect the execution of
.Nm :
.Ev LANG ,
.Ev LC_ALL ,
.Ev LC_COLLATE ,
.Ev LC_CTYPE ,
.Ev LC_MESSAGES ,
.Ev LC_NUMERIC ,
and
.Ev NLSPATH .
.Sh INTERFACE STABILITY
The command line interface of
.Nm
is
.Sy Committed .
The output of
.Nm
is
.Sy Committed .
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr cmp 1 ,
.Xr diff 1 ,
.Xr sort 1 ,
.Xr uniq 1 ,
.Xr attributes 5 ,
.Xr environ 5 ,
.Xr largefile 5 ,
.Xr standards 5
