.\"
.\" Sun Microsystems, Inc. gratefully acknowledges The Open Group for
.\" permission to reproduce portions of its copyrighted documentation.
.\" Original documentation from The Open Group can be obtained online at
.\" http://www.opengroup.org/bookstore/.
.\"
.\" The Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers and The Open
.\" Group, have given us permission to reprint portions of their
.\" documentation.
.\"
.\" In the following statement, the phrase ``this text'' refers to portions
.\" of the system documentation.
.\"
.\" Portions of this text are reprinted and reproduced in electronic form
.\" in the SunOS Reference Manual, from IEEE Std 1003.1, 2004 Edition,
.\" Standard for Information Technology -- Portable Operating System
.\" Interface (POSIX), The Open Group Base Specifications Issue 6,
.\" Copyright (C) 2001-2004 by the Institute of Electrical and Electronics
.\" Engineers, Inc and The Open Group.  In the event of any discrepancy
.\" between these versions and the original IEEE and The Open Group
.\" Standard, the original IEEE and The Open Group Standard is the referee
.\" document.  The original Standard can be obtained online at
.\" http://www.opengroup.org/unix/online.html.
.\"
.\" This notice shall appear on any product containing this material.
.\"
.\" The contents of this file are subject to the terms of the
.\" Common Development and Distribution License (the "License").
.\" You may not use this file except in compliance with the License.
.\"
.\" You can obtain a copy of the license at usr/src/OPENSOLARIS.LICENSE
.\" or http://www.opensolaris.org/os/licensing.
.\" See the License for the specific language governing permissions
.\" and limitations under the License.
.\"
.\" When distributing Covered Code, include this CDDL HEADER in each
.\" file and include the License file at usr/src/OPENSOLARIS.LICENSE.
.\" If applicable, add the following below this CDDL HEADER, with the
.\" fields enclosed by brackets "[]" replaced with your own identifying
.\" information: Portions Copyright [yyyy] [name of copyright owner]
.\"
.\"
.\" Copyright 1989 AT&T
.\" Portions Copyright (c) 1992, X/Open Company Limited  All Rights Reserved
.\" Copyright (c) 1999, Sun Microsystems, Inc.  All Rights Reserved
.\" Copyright 2021 OmniOS Community Edition (OmniOSce) Association.
.\"
.Dd Feb 9, 2021
.Dt CUT 1
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm cut
.Nd cut out selected columns or fields of each line of a file
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Nm
.Fl b Ar list
.Op Fl nN
.Op Fl r Ar reclen
.Oo Ar file Oc Ns ...
.Pp
.Nm
.Fl c Ar list
.Op Fl N
.Op Fl r Ar reclen
.Oo Ar file Oc Ns ...
.Pp
.Nm
.Fl f Ar list
.Op Fl s
.Op Fl d Ar delim
.Op Fl D Ar ldelim
.Oo Ar file Oc Ns ...
.Sh DESCRIPTION
Use the
.Nm
utility to cut out columns from a table or fields from each line of a file.
In database parlance, it implements the projection of a relation.
The fields as specified by
.Ar list
can be fixed length, that is, character positions as on a punched card
.Pq Fl c No option
or the length can vary from line to line and be marked with a field delimiter
character such as TAB
.Po Fl f No option Pc .
.Nm
can be used as a filter.
.Pp
Either the
.Fl b ,
.Fl c ,
or
.Fl f
option must be specified.
.Pp
Use
.Xr grep 1
to make horizontal cuts (by context) through a file, or
.Xr paste 1
to put files together column-wise (that is, horizontally).
To reorder columns in a table, use
.Nm cut
and
.Xr paste 1 .
.Sh OPTIONS
The following options are supported:
.Bl -tag -width Ar
.It Fl b Ar list Ns \&, Fl \-bytes Ns = Ns Ar list
The
.Ar list
following
.Fl b
specifies byte positions (for instance,
.Fl b Ar 1-72
would pass the first 72 bytes of each line).
When
.Fl b
and
.Fl n
are used together, list is adjusted so that no multi-byte character is split.
.It Fl c Ar list Ns \&, Fl \-characters Ns = Ns Ar list
The
.Ar list
following
.Fl c
specifies character positions (for instance,
.Fl c Ar 1-72
would pass the first 72 characters of each line).
.It Fl d Ar delim Ns \&, Fl \-delimiter Ns = Ns Ar delim
The character following
.Fl d
is the field delimiter
.Po Fl f No option only Pc ;
the default is the TAB character.
Space or other characters with special meaning to the shell must be quoted.
delim can be a multi-byte character.
.It Fl f Ar list Ns \&, Fl \-fields Ns = Ns Ar list
The
.Ar list
following
.Fl f
is a list of fields assumed to be separated in the file by a delimiter
character
.Po see Fl d Pc ;
for instance,
.Fl f Ar 1,7
copies the first and seventh field only.
Lines with no field delimiters will be passed through intact (useful for table
subheadings), unless
.Fl s
is specified.
.It Fl n Ns \&, Fl \-split Ns \&, Fl \-nosplit
Controls whether multi-byte characters are split with the
.Fl b
option.
The default is to split characters and this can be disabled with the
.Fl n
or
.Fl \-nosplit
flag.
Unless specified, lines with no delimiters will be passed through untouched.
.It Fl r Ar reclen Ns \&, Fl R Ar reclen Ns \&, Fl \-reclen Ns = Ns Ar reclen
If
.Ar reclen
is > 0, the input will be read as fixed length records of length
.Ar reclen
when used with the
.Fl b
or
.Fl c
options.
.It Fl s Ns \&, Fl \-suppress Ns \&, Fl \-only-delimited
Suppress lines which do not contain any delimiter characters
.Po Fl f No option only Pc .
.It Fl D Ar ldelim Ns \&, Fl \-line-delimiter Ns = Ns Ar ldelim Ns \&, Fl \-output-delimiter Ns = Ns Ar ldelim
The line delimiter for the
.Fl f
option is set to
.Ar ldelim .
The default is the newline character.
.It Fl N Ns \&, Fl \-newline Ns \&, Fl \-nonewline
Controls whether to output a new-line at the end of each record when used with
the
.Fl b
or
.Fl c
options.
This is on by default;
.Fl N
turns it off and is the same as specifying
.Fl \-nonewline .
.El
.Pp
In the above options,
.Ar list
is a comma-separated or blank-character-separated list of integer field, byte
or character numbers (in increasing order), with optional
.Ar \(mi
to indicate ranges (for instance,
.Em 1,4,7 ;
.Em 1\(mi3,8 ;
.Em \(mi5,10
.Po short for Ar 1\(mi5,10 Pc ;
or
.Ar 3\(mi
.Po short for third through last field Pc .
)
.Sh OPERANDS
The following operands are supported:
.Bl -tag -width Ar
.It Ar file
A path name of an input file.
If no file operands are specified, or if a file operand is
.Sy \- ,
the standard input will be used.
.El
.Sh EXIT STATUS
.Bl -tag -width Ds
.It Sy 0
All input files were output successfully.
.It Sy >0
An error occurred.
.El
.Sh EXAMPLES
.Bl -tag -width 6
.It Sy Example 1 No Mapping user IDs
.Pp
A mapping of user IDs to names follows:
.Bd -literal
    $ cut -d: -f1,5 /etc/passwd
.Ed
.It Sy Example 2 No Setting current login name
.Pp
To set
.Ar name
to current login name:
.Bd -literal
    $ name=\(gawho am i | cut -f1 -d' '\(ga
.Ed
.El
.Sh ENVIRONMENT VARIABLES
See
.Xr environ 5
for descriptions of the following environment variables
that affect the execution of
.Nm :
.Ev LANG ,
.Ev LC_ALL ,
.Ev LC_CTYPE ,
.Ev LC_MESSAGES ,
.Ev LC_NUMERIC ,
and
.Ev NLSPATH .
.Sh INTERFACE STABILITY
The command line interface of
.Nm
is
.Sy Committed .
The output of
.Nm
is
.Sy Committed .
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr grep 1 ,
.Xr paste 1 ,
.Xr attributes 5 ,
.Xr environ 5 ,
.Xr largefile 5 ,
.Xr standards 5
