.\"
.\" Sun Microsystems, Inc. gratefully acknowledges The Open Group for
.\" permission to reproduce portions of its copyrighted documentation.
.\" Original documentation from The Open Group can be obtained online at
.\" http://www.opengroup.org/bookstore/.
.\"
.\" The Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers and The Open
.\" Group, have given us permission to reprint portions of their
.\" documentation.
.\"
.\" In the following statement, the phrase ``this text'' refers to portions
.\" of the system documentation.
.\"
.\" Portions of this text are reprinted and reproduced in electronic form
.\" in the SunOS Reference Manual, from IEEE Std 1003.1, 2004 Edition,
.\" Standard for Information Technology -- Portable Operating System
.\" Interface (POSIX), The Open Group Base Specifications Issue 6,
.\" Copyright (C) 2001-2004 by the Institute of Electrical and Electronics
.\" Engineers, Inc and The Open Group.  In the event of any discrepancy
.\" between these versions and the original IEEE and The Open Group
.\" Standard, the original IEEE and The Open Group Standard is the referee
.\" document.  The original Standard can be obtained online at
.\" http://www.opengroup.org/unix/online.html.
.\"
.\" This notice shall appear on any product containing this material.
.\"
.\" The contents of this file are subject to the terms of the
.\" Common Development and Distribution License (the "License").
.\" You may not use this file except in compliance with the License.
.\"
.\" You can obtain a copy of the license at usr/src/OPENSOLARIS.LICENSE
.\" or http://www.opensolaris.org/os/licensing.
.\" See the License for the specific language governing permissions
.\" and limitations under the License.
.\"
.\" When distributing Covered Code, include this CDDL HEADER in each
.\" file and include the License file at usr/src/OPENSOLARIS.LICENSE.
.\" If applicable, add the following below this CDDL HEADER, with the
.\" fields enclosed by brackets "[]" replaced with your own identifying
.\" information: Portions Copyright [yyyy] [name of copyright owner]
.\"
.\"
.\" Copyright 1989 AT&T
.\" Portions Copyright (c) 1992, X/Open Company Limited All Rights Reserved
.\" Portions Copyright (c) 1982-2007 AT&T Knowledge Ventures
.\" Copyright (c) 2007, Sun Microsystems, Inc. All Rights Reserved
.\" Copyright 2021 OmniOS Community Edition (OmniOSce) Association.
.\"
.TH JOBS 1 "Feb 9, 2021"
.SH NAME
jobs, fg, bg, stop, notify \- control process execution
.SH SYNOPSIS

.SS "csh"
.nf
\fBjobs\fR [\fB-l\fR]
.fi

.LP
.nf
\fBfg\fR [% \fIjob_id\fR]
.fi

.LP
.nf
\fBbg\fR [% \fIjob_id\fR]...
.fi

.LP
.nf
\fBnotify\fR [% \fIjob_id\fR]...
.fi

.LP
.nf
\fBstop\fR % \fIjob_id\fR...
.fi

.LP
.nf
\fBstop\fR \fIpid\fR...
.fi

.SS "ksh93"
.nf
\fBjobs\fR [\fB-lnp\fR] [\fIjob_id\fR...]
.fi

.LP
.nf
\fBfg\fR [\fIjob_id\fR...]
.fi

.LP
.nf
\fBbg\fR [\fIjob_id\fR...]
.fi

.SH DESCRIPTION
.SS "csh"
The C shell built-in, \fBjobs\fR, without an argument, lists the active jobs
under job control.
.sp
.ne 2
.na
\fB\fB-l\fR\fR
.ad
.RS 6n
List process \fBID\fRs, in addition to the normal information.
.RE

.sp
.LP
The shell associates a numbered \fIjob_id\fR with each command sequence to keep
track of those commands that are running in the background or have been stopped
with \fBTSTP\fR signals (typically Control-Z). When a command or command
sequence (semicolon-separated list) is started in the background using the
\fB&\fR metacharacter, the shell displays a line with the job number in
brackets and a list of associated process numbers:
.sp
.LP
\fB[1] 1234\fR
.sp
.LP
To see the current list of jobs, use the \fBjobs\fR built-in command. The job
most recently stopped (or put into the background if none are stopped) is
referred to as the \fBcurrent\fR job and is indicated with a `\fB+\fR'. The
previous job is indicated with a `\fB\(mi\fR\&'; when the current job is
terminated or moved to the foreground, this job takes its place (becomes the
new current job).
.sp
.LP
To manipulate jobs, refer to the \fBbg\fR, \fBfg\fR, \fBkill\fR, \fBstop\fR,
and \fB%\fR built-in commands.
.sp
.LP
A reference to a job begins with a `\fB%\fR'. By itself, the percent sign
refers to the current job.
.sp
.ne 2
.na
\fB\fB%\fR \fB%+\fR \fB%%\fR\fR
.ad
.RS 12n
The current job.
.RE

.sp
.ne 2
.na
\fB\fB%\(mi\fR\fR
.ad
.RS 12n
The previous job.
.RE

.sp
.ne 2
.na
\fB\fB%\fR\fIj\fR\fR
.ad
.RS 12n
Refer to job \fIj\fR as in: `\fBkill\fR \fB-9\fR \fB%\fR\fIj\fR'. \fIj\fR can
be a job number, or a string that uniquely specifies the command line by which
it was started; `\fBfg %vi\fR' might bring a stopped \fBvi\fR job to the
foreground, for instance.
.RE

.sp
.ne 2
.na
\fB\fB%?\fR\fIstring\fR\fR
.ad
.RS 12n
Specify the job for which the command line uniquely contains \fIstring\fR.
.RE

.sp
.LP
A job running in the background stops when it attempts to read from the
terminal. Background jobs can normally produce output, but this can be
suppressed using the `\fBstty tostop\fR' command.
.sp
.LP
\fBfg\fR brings the current or specified \fIjob_id\fR into the foreground.
.sp
.LP
\fBbg\fR runs the current or specified jobs in the background.
.sp
.LP
\fBstop\fR stops the execution of a background job(s) by using its
\fIjob_id\fR, or of any process by using its \fIpid\fR; see \fBps\fR(1).
.sp
.LP
\fBnotify\fR notifies the user asynchronously when the status of the current
job or specified jobs changes.
.SS "ksh93"
\fBjobs\fR displays information about specified jobs that were started by the
current shell environment on standard output. The information contains the job
number enclosed in \fB[...]\fR, the status, and the command line that started
the job.
.sp
.LP
If \fIjob_id\fR is omitted, \fBjobs\fR displays the status of all stopped jobs,
background jobs, and all jobs whose status has changed since last reported by
the shell.
.sp
.LP
When \fBjobs\fR reports the termination status of a job, the shell removes the
job from the list of known jobs in the current shell environment.
.sp
.LP
The following options modify or enhances the output of \fBjobs\fR:
.sp
.ne 2
.na
\fB\fB-l\fR\fR
.ad
.RS 6n
Displays process IDs after the job number in addition to the usual information.
.RE

.sp
.ne 2
.na
\fB\fB-n\fR\fR
.ad
.RS 6n
Displays only the jobs whose status has changed since the last prompt was
displayed.
.RE

.sp
.ne 2
.na
\fB\fB-p\fR\fR
.ad
.RS 6n
Displays the process group leader IDs for the specified jobs.
.RE

.sp
.LP
\fIjob_id\fR can be specified to \fBjobs\fR, \fBfg\fR, and \fBbg\fR as one of
the following:
.sp
.ne 2
.na
\fB\fInumber\fR\fR
.ad
.RS 12n
The process id of \fBjob\fR.
.RE

.sp
.ne 2
.na
\fB\fB-\fR\fInumber\fR\fR
.ad
.RS 12n
The process group id of \fBjob\fR.
.RE

.sp
.ne 2
.na
\fB\fB%\fR\fInumber\fR\fR
.ad
.RS 12n
The job number.
.RE

.sp
.ne 2
.na
\fB\fB%\fR\fIstring\fR\fR
.ad
.RS 12n
The job whose name begins with \fIstring\fR.
.RE

.sp
.ne 2
.na
\fB\fB%?\fR\fIstring\fR\fR
.ad
.RS 12n
The job whose name contains \fIstring\fR.
.RE

.sp
.ne 2
.na
\fB\fB%+\fR\fR
.ad
.br
.na
\fB\fB%%\fR\fR
.ad
.RS 12n
The current job.
.RE

.sp
.ne 2
.na
\fB\fB%-\fR\fR
.ad
.RS 12n
The previous job.
.RE

.sp
.LP
\fBfg\fR places the specified jobs into the foreground in sequence and sends a
\fBCONT\fR signal to start each running. If \fIjob_id\fR is omitted, the most
recently started or stopped background job is moved to the foreground.
.sp
.LP
\fBbg\fR places the specified jobs into the background and sends a \fBCONT\fR
signal to start them running. If \fIjob_id\fR is omitted, the most recently
started or stopped background job is resumed or continued in the background.
.SH OUTPUT
If the \fB-p\fR option is specified, the output consists of one line for each
process \fBID\fR:
.sp
.LP
\fB"%d\en",\fR \fI"process ID"\fR
.sp
.LP
Otherwise, if the \fB-l\fR option is not specified, the output is a series of
lines of the form:
.sp
.LP
\fB"[%d] %c %s %s\en"\fR, \fIjob-number\fR, \fIcurrent\fR, \fIstate\fR,
\fIcommand\fR
.sp
.LP
where the fields are as follows:
.sp
.ne 2
.na
\fB\fIcurrent\fR\fR
.ad
.RS 14n
The character \fB+\fR identifies the job that would be used as a default for
the \fBfg\fR or \fBbg\fR commands. This job can also be specified using the
\fIjob_id\fR \fB%+\fR or \fB%%\fR \fB\&.\fR The character \fB\(mi\fR identifies
the job that would become the default if the current default job were to exit;
this job can also be specified using the \fIjob_id\fR \fB%\(mi\fR \fB\&.\fR For
other jobs, this field is a space character. At most, one job can be identified
with \fB+\fR and at most one job can be identified with \fB\(mi\fR\&. If there
is any suspended job, then the current job is a suspended job. If there are at
least two suspended jobs, then the previous job is also a suspended job.
.RE

.sp
.ne 2
.na
\fB\fIjob-number\fR\fR
.ad
.RS 14n
A number that can be used to identify the process group to the \fBwait\fR,
\fBfg\fR, \fBbg,\fR and \fBkill\fR utilities. Using these utilities, the job
can be identified by prefixing the job number with \fB%\fR.
.RE

.sp
.ne 2
.na
\fB\fIstate\fR\fR
.ad
.RS 14n
One of the following strings in the POSIX Locale:
.sp
.ne 2
.na
\fB\fBRunning\fR\fR
.ad
.RS 20n
Indicates that the job has not been suspended by a signal and has not exited.
.RE

.sp
.ne 2
.na
\fB\fBDone\fR\fR
.ad
.RS 20n
Indicates that the job completed and returned exit status zero.
.RE

.sp
.ne 2
.na
\fB\fBDone\fR(\fIcode\fR)\fR
.ad
.RS 20n
Indicates that the job completed normally and that it exited with the specified
\fBnon-zero\fR exit status, \fIcode\fR, expressed as a decimal number.
.RE

.sp
.ne 2
.na
\fB\fBStopped\fR\fR
.ad
.RS 20n
Indicates that the job was stopped.
.RE

.sp
.ne 2
.na
\fB\fBStopped(SIGTSTP)\fR\fR
.ad
.RS 20n
Indicates that the job was suspended by the \fBSIGTSTP\fR signal.
.RE

.sp
.ne 2
.na
\fB\fBStopped(SIGSTOP)\fR\fR
.ad
.RS 20n
Indicates that the job was suspended by the \fBSIGSTOP\fR signal.
.RE

.sp
.ne 2
.na
\fB\fBStopped(SIGTTIN)\fR\fR
.ad
.RS 20n
Indicates that the job was suspended by the \fBSIGTTIN\fR signal.
.RE

.sp
.ne 2
.na
\fB\fBStopped(SIGTTOU)\fR\fR
.ad
.RS 20n
Indicates that the job was suspended by the \fBSIGTTOU\fR signal.
.RE

The implementation can substitute the string \fBSuspended\fR in place of
\fBStopped\fR. If the job was terminated by a signal, the format of \fBstate\fR
is unspecified, but it is visibly distinct from all of the other \fBstate\fR
formats shown here and indicates the name or description of the signal causing
the termination.
.RE

.sp
.ne 2
.na
\fB\fIcommand\fR\fR
.ad
.RS 14n
The associated command that was specified to the shell.
.RE

.sp
.LP
If the \fB-l\fR option is specified, a field containing the process group
\fBID\fR is inserted before the \fBstate\fR field. Also, more processes in a
process group can be output on separate lines, using only the process \fBID\fR
and \fBcommand\fR fields.
.SH ENVIRONMENT VARIABLES
See \fBenviron\fR(5) for descriptions of the following environment variables
that affect the execution of \fBjobs\fR, \fBfg\fR, and \fBbg\fR: \fBLANG\fR,
\fBLC_ALL\fR, \fBLC_CTYPE\fR, \fBLC_MESSAGES\fR, and \fBNLSPATH\fR.
.SH EXIT STATUS
.SS "csh"
The following exit values are returned for \fBjobs\fR, \fBfg\fR, and \fBbg\fR:
.sp
.ne 2
.na
\fB\fB0\fR\fR
.ad
.RS 6n
Successful completion.
.RE

.sp
.ne 2
.na
\fB\fB>0\fR\fR
.ad
.RS 6n
An error occurred.
.RE

.SS "ksh93"
The following exit values are returned for \fBjobs\fR:
.sp
.ne 2
.na
\fB\fB0\fR\fR
.ad
.RS 6n
The information for each job is written to standard output.
.RE

.sp
.ne 2
.na
\fB\fB>0\fR\fR
.ad
.RS 6n
One or more jobs does not exist.
.RE

.sp
.LP
The following exit values are returned for \fBfg\fR:
.sp
.ne 2
.na
\fB\fBexit status of last job\fR\fR
.ad
.RS 27n
One or more jobs has been brought into the foreground.
.RE

.sp
.ne 2
.na
\fB\fBnon-zero\fR\fR
.ad
.RS 27n
One or more jobs does not exist or has completed.
.RE

.sp
.LP
The following exit values are returned for \fBbg\fR:
.sp
.ne 2
.na
\fB\fB0\fR\fR
.ad
.RS 6n
All background jobs are started.
.RE

.sp
.ne 2
.na
\fB\fB>0\fR\fR
.ad
.RS 6n
One more jobs does not exist or there are no background jobs.
.RE

.SH ATTRIBUTES
See \fBattributes\fR(5) for descriptions of the following attributes:
.SS "csh"
.TS
box;
c | c
l | l .
ATTRIBUTE TYPE	ATTRIBUTE VALUE
_
Interface Stability	Committed
_
Standard	See \fBstandards\fR(5).
.TE

.SS "ksh93"
.TS
box;
c | c
l | l .
ATTRIBUTE TYPE	ATTRIBUTE VALUE
_
Interface Stability	Uncommitted
.TE

.SH SEE ALSO
\fBcsh\fR(1), \fBkill\fR(1), \fBksh93\fR(1), \fBps\fR(1),
\fBstop\fR(1), \fBshell_builtins\fR(1), \fBstty\fR(1),
\fBwait\fR(1), \fBsignal.h\fR(3HEAD), \fBattributes\fR(5), \fBenviron\fR(5),
\fBstandards\fR(5)
