.\"
.\" Sun Microsystems, Inc. gratefully acknowledges The Open Group for
.\" permission to reproduce portions of its copyrighted documentation.
.\" Original documentation from The Open Group can be obtained online at
.\" http://www.opengroup.org/bookstore/.
.\"
.\" The Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers and The Open
.\" Group, have given us permission to reprint portions of their
.\" documentation.
.\"
.\" In the following statement, the phrase ``this text'' refers to portions
.\" of the system documentation.
.\"
.\" Portions of this text are reprinted and reproduced in electronic form
.\" in the SunOS Reference Manual, from IEEE Std 1003.1, 2004 Edition,
.\" Standard for Information Technology -- Portable Operating System
.\" Interface (POSIX), The Open Group Base Specifications Issue 6,
.\" Copyright (C) 2001-2004 by the Institute of Electrical and Electronics
.\" Engineers, Inc and The Open Group.  In the event of any discrepancy
.\" between these versions and the original IEEE and The Open Group
.\" Standard, the original IEEE and The Open Group Standard is the referee
.\" document.  The original Standard can be obtained online at
.\" http://www.opengroup.org/unix/online.html.
.\"
.\" This notice shall appear on any product containing this material.
.\"
.\" The contents of this file are subject to the terms of the
.\" Common Development and Distribution License (the "License").
.\" You may not use this file except in compliance with the License.
.\"
.\" You can obtain a copy of the license at usr/src/OPENSOLARIS.LICENSE
.\" or http://www.opensolaris.org/os/licensing.
.\" See the License for the specific language governing permissions
.\" and limitations under the License.
.\"
.\" When distributing Covered Code, include this CDDL HEADER in each
.\" file and include the License file at usr/src/OPENSOLARIS.LICENSE.
.\" If applicable, add the following below this CDDL HEADER, with the
.\" fields enclosed by brackets "[]" replaced with your own identifying
.\" information: Portions Copyright [yyyy] [name of copyright owner]
.\"
.\"
.\" Copyright 1989 AT&T
.\" Portions Copyright (c) 1992, X/Open Company Limited All Rights Reserved
.\" Portions Copyright (c) 1982-2007 AT&T Knowledge Ventures
.\" Copyright (c) 2007, Sun Microsystems, Inc. All Rights Reserved
.\" Portions Copyright 2021 OmniOS Community Edition (OmniOSce) Association.
.\"
.Dd Feb 9, 2021
.Dt KILL 1
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm kill
.Nd short description
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Nm /usr/bin/kill
.Fl s Ar signame Ar pid Ns ...
.Pp
.Nm /usr/bin/kill
.Fl n Ar signum Ar pid Ns ...
.Pp
.Nm /usr/bin/kill
.Fl l Op Ar exit_status
.Pp
.Nm /usr/bin/kill
.Fl L Op Ar exit_status
.Pp
.Nm /usr/bin/kill
.Op Fl signame Ar pid Ns ...
.Pp
.Nm /usr/bin/kill
.Op Fl signum Ar pid Ns ...
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The
.Nm
utility sends a signal to the process or processes specified by each
.Ar pid
operand.
.Pp
For each
.Ar pid
operand, the
.Nm
utility performs actions equivalent to the
.Xr kill 2
function called with the following arguments:
.Bl -enum -offset Ds
.It
The value of the
.Ar pid
operand is used as the
.Ar pid
argument.
.It
The
.Ar sig
argument is the value specified by the
.Fl s
option, the
.Fl n
option, the
.Fl signame
option, or the
.Fl signum
option, or, if none of these options is specified, by
.Dv SIGTERM .
.El
.Pp
The signaled process must belong to the current user unless the user is the
super-user.
.Pp
See NOTES for descriptions of the shell built-in versions of
.Nm .
.Sh OPTIONS
The following options are supported:
.Bl -tag -width Ar
.It Fl l
(The letter ell).
Writes all values of
.Ar signame
supported by the implementation, if no operand is specified.
If an
.Ar exit_status
operand is specified and it is a value of the
.Sy \&?
shell special parameter or
.Sy wait
built-in corresponding to a process that was terminated by a signal, the
.Ar signame
corresponding to the signal that terminated the process is
written.
If an
.Ar exit_status
operand is specified and it is the unsigned
decimal integer value of a signal number, the
.Ar signame
corresponding
to that signal is written.
Otherwise, the results are unspecified.
.It Fl L
Same as
.Fl l
except that if no arguments are specified then the signals will be listed in
a menu format.
.It Fl s Ar signame
Specifies the signal to send, using one of the symbolic names defined in the
.In signal.h
description.
Values of
.Ar signame
are recognised in a
case-independent fashion, without the
.Sy SIG
prefix.
In addition, the symbolic name
.Sy 0
is recognised, representing the signal value zero.
The
corresponding signal is sent instead of
.Dv SIGTERM
.It Fl n Ar signum
Specify a signal number to send.
Signal numbers are not portable across platforms, except for the following:
.Bl -tag -width Ds -offset indent
.It 0
No signal.
.It 1
HUP
.It 2
INT
.It 3
QUIT
.It 6
ABRT
.It 9
KILL
.It 14
ALRM
.It 15
TERM
.El
.It Ar \-signame
Equivalent to
.Fl s
.Ar signame .
.It Ar \-signum
Equivalent to
.Fl n
.Ar signum .
.El
.Sh OPERANDS
The following operands are supported:
.Bl -tag -width Ar
.It Ar pid
One of the following:
.Bl -enum -offset Ds
.It
A decimal integer specifying a process or process group to be signaled.
The process or processes selected by positive, negative and zero values of the
.Ar pid
operand is as described for the kill function.
If process number 0 is specified, all processes in the process group are
signaled.
If the first
.Ar pid
operand is negative, it should be preceded by
.Sy \--
to keep it from being interpreted as an option.
.It
A job control job
.Sy ID
that identifies a background process group to be signaled.
The job control job
.Sy ID
notation is applicable only for invocations of
.Nm
in the current shell execution environment.
.El
.Pp
The job control job
.Sy ID
type of
.Ar pid
is available only on systems supporting the job control option.
.It Ar exit_status
A decimal integer specifying a signal number or the exit status of a process
terminated by a signal.
.El
.Sh USAGE
Process numbers can be found by using
.Xr ps 1 .
.Pp
The job control job
.Sy ID
notation is not required to work as expected when
.Nm
is operating in its own utility execution environment.
In either of the following examples:
.Bd -literal
    $ nohup kill %1 &
    $ system( "kill %1");
.Ed
.Pp
.Nm
operates in a different environment and does not share the shell's
understanding of job numbers.
.Sh EXIT STATUS
The following exit values are returned:
.Bl -tag -width Ds
.It Sy 0
At least one matching process was found for each
.Ar pid
operand, and the specified signal was successfully processed for at least one
matching process.
.It Sy >0
An error occurred.
.El
.Sh EXAMPLES
.Bl -tag -width 6
.It Sy Example 1 No Sending the kill signal
.Pp
Any of the commands:
.Bd -literal
    $ kill -9 100 -165
    $ kill -s kill 100 -165
    $ kill -s KILL 100 -165
.Ed
.Pp
sends the
.Dv SIGKILL
signal to the process whose process
.Sy ID
is
.Sy 100
and to all processes whose process group
.Sy ID
is
.Sy 165 ,
assuming the sending process has permission to send that signal to the
specified processes, and that they exist.
.It Sy Example 2 No Avoiding ambiguity with an initial negative number
.Pp
To avoid an ambiguity of an initial negative number argument specifying either
a signal number or a process group, the former is always be the case.
Therefore, to send the default signal to a process group
.Po for example,
.Sy 123
.Pc ,
an application should use a command similar to one of the following:
.Bd -literal
    $ kill -TERM -123
    $ kill -- -123
.Ed
.El
.Sh ENVIRONMENT VARIABLES
See
.Xr environ 5
for descriptions of the following environment variables
that affect the execution of
.Nm :
.Ev LANG ,
.Ev LC_ALL ,
.Ev LC_TYPE ,
.Ev LC_MESSAGES ,
.Ev LC_NUMERIC ,
and
.Ev NLSPATH .
.Sh INTERFACE STABILITY
The command line interface of
.Nm
is
.Sy Committed .
The output of
.Nm
is
.Sy Committed .
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr csh 1 ,
.Xr getconf 1 ,
.Xr jobs 1 ,
.Xr ksh93 1 ,
.Xr ps 1 ,
.Xr shell_builtins 1 ,
.Xr wait 1 ,
.Xr kill 2 ,
.Xr signal 3C ,
.Xr signal.h 3HEAD ,
.Xr attributes 5 ,
.Xr environ 5 ,
.Xr standards 5
.Sh NOTES
.Ss /usr/bin/kill
The number of realtime signals supported is defined by the
.Xr getconf 1
value
.Dv _POSIX_RTSIG_MAX .
.Ss csh
The C-shell,
.Xr csh 1 ,
also has a built-in
.Nm
command, whose syntax is:
.Bd -ragged -offset indent
.Nm Op Fl sig | Op Ar pid | Op Ar %job
.Pp
.Nm Fl l
.Ed
.Pp
The
.Sy csh
.Nm
built-in sends the
.Sy TERM
(terminate) signal, by default, or the signal specified, to the specified
process
.Sy ID ,
the
.Ar job
indicated, or the current
.Ar job .
Signals are either specified by number or by name.
There is no default.
Typing
.Nm
does not send a signal to the current job.
If the signal being sent is
.Dv TERM
(terminate)
or
.Dv HUP
(hangup), then the job or process is sent a
.Dv CONT
(continue) signal as well.
.Pp
.Fl l
lists the signal names that can be sent.
.Ss ksh93
.Xr ksh93 1
also has a built-in
.Nm
command with the same syntax as described above.
Within the shell context, a job may be specified as one of the following:
.Bl -tag -width Ds -offset indent
.It Ar number
The process id of
.Ar job .
.It Ar \-number
The process group id of
.Ar job .
.It Ar \&%number
The job number.
.It Ar \&%string
The job whose name begins with
.Ar string .
.It Ar \&%?string
The job whose name contains
.Ar string .
.It Ar \&%+ Ns \&, Ar \&%%
The current job
.It Ar \&%-
The previous job.
.El
