.\"
.\" Sun Microsystems, Inc. gratefully acknowledges The Open Group for
.\" permission to reproduce portions of its copyrighted documentation.
.\" Original documentation from The Open Group can be obtained online at
.\" http://www.opengroup.org/bookstore/.
.\"
.\" The Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers and The Open
.\" Group, have given us permission to reprint portions of their
.\" documentation.
.\"
.\" In the following statement, the phrase ``this text'' refers to portions
.\" of the system documentation.
.\"
.\" Portions of this text are reprinted and reproduced in electronic form
.\" in the SunOS Reference Manual, from IEEE Std 1003.1, 2004 Edition,
.\" Standard for Information Technology -- Portable Operating System
.\" Interface (POSIX), The Open Group Base Specifications Issue 6,
.\" Copyright (C) 2001-2004 by the Institute of Electrical and Electronics
.\" Engineers, Inc and The Open Group. In the event of any discrepancy
.\" between these versions and the original IEEE and The Open Group
.\" Standard, the original IEEE and The Open Group Standard is the referee
.\" document. The original Standard can be obtained online at
.\" http://www.opengroup.org/unix/online.html.
.\"
.\" This notice shall appear on any product containing this material.
.\"
.\" The contents of this file are subject to the terms of the
.\" Common Development and Distribution License (the "License").
.\" You may not use this file except in compliance with the License.
.\"
.\" You can obtain a copy of the license at usr/src/OPENSOLARIS.LICENSE
.\" or http://www.opensolaris.org/os/licensing.
.\" See the License for the specific language governing permissions
.\" and limitations under the License.
.\"
.\" When distributing Covered Code, include this CDDL HEADER in each
.\" file and include the License file at usr/src/OPENSOLARIS.LICENSE.
.\" If applicable, add the following below this CDDL HEADER, with the
.\" fields enclosed by brackets "[]" replaced with your own identifying
.\" information: Portions Copyright [yyyy] [name of copyright owner]
.\"
.\"
.\" Copyright 1989 AT&T
.\" Copyright (c) 1992, X/Open Company Limited. All Rights Reserved.
.\" Portions Copyright (c) 1996, Sun Microsystems, Inc. All Rights Reserved.
.\" Portions Copyright 2021 OmniOS Community Edition (OmniOSce) Association.
.\"
.Dd Feb 9, 2021
.Dt PASTE 1
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm paste
.Nd merge corresponding or subsequent lines of files
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Nm
.Op Fl s
.Op Fl d Ar list
.Oo Ar file Oc Ns ...
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The
.Nm
utility will concatenate the corresponding lines of the given
input files, and write the resulting lines to standard output.
.Pp
The default operation of
.Nm
will concatenate the corresponding lines of the input files.
The
.Dv NEWLINE
character of every line except the line from the last input file will be
replaced with a
.Dv TAB
character.
.Pp
If an
.Dv EOF
(end-of-file) condition is detected on one or more input files, but not all
input files,
.Nm
will behave as though empty lines were read from the files on which
.Dv EOF
was detected, unless the
.Fl s
option is specified.
.Pp
If no file operands are given or if the file is
.Sy \- ,
.Nm
reads from standard input.
The start of the file is defined as the current offset.
.Sh OPTIONS
The following options are supported:
.Bl -tag -width Ar
.It Fl d Ar list Ns \&, Fl \-delimiters Ns = Ns Ar list
Unless a backslash character (\&\\) appears in
.Ar list ,
each character in
.Ar list
is an element specifying a delimiter character.
If a backslash character appears in
.Ar list ,
the backslash character and one or more characters following it are an element
specifying a delimiter character as described below.
These elements specify one or more delimiters to use, instead of the default
.Dv TAB
character, to replace the
.Dv NEWLINE
character of the input lines.
The elements in
.Ar list
are used circularly; that is, when the list is exhausted, the first element
from the list is reused.
.Pp
When the
.Fl s
option is specified:
.Bl -bullet -width Ds
.It
The last newline character in a file will not be modified.
.It
The delimiter will be reset to the first element of list after each
.Ar file
operand is processed.
.El
.Pp
When the
.Fl s
option is not specified:
.Bl -bullet -width Ds
.It
The
.Dv NEWLINE
characters in the file specified by the last
.Ar file
will not be modified.
.It
The delimiter will be reset to the first element of
.Ar list
each time a line is processed from each file.
.El
.Pp
If a backslash character appears in
.Ar list ,
it and the character following it will be used to represent the following
delimiter characters:
.Bl -tag -width Ds
.It Sy \en
Newline character.
.It Sy \et
Tab character.
.It Sy \e\e
Backslash character.
.It Sy \e0
Empty string (not a null character).
If
.Sy \e0 is immediately followed by the character
.Sy x ,
the character
.Sy X ,
or any character defined by the
.Dv LC_CTYPE digit
keyword, the results are unspecified.
.El
.Pp
If any other characters follow the backslash, the results are unspecified.
.It Fl s Ns \&, Fl \-serial
Concatenate all of the lines of each separate input file in command line order.
The
.Dv NEWLINE
character of every line except the last line in each input file will be
replaced with the
.Dv TAB
character, unless otherwise specified by the
.Fl d
option.
.El
.Sh OPERANDS
The following operands are supported:
.Bl -tag -width Ar
.It Ar file
A path name of an input file.
If
.Sy -
is specified for one or more of the
.Ar files ,
the standard input will be used.
The standard input will be read one line at a time, circularly, for each
instance of
.Sy - .
At least 12
.Ar file
operands can be provided.
.El
.Sh EXIT STATUS
The following exit values are returned:
.Bl -tag -width Ds
.It Sy 0
All input files were successfully processed.
.It Sy >0
An error occurred.
.El
.Sh EXAMPLES
.Bl -tag -width 6
.It Sy Example 1 No Listing a directory in one column
.Bd -literal
    $ ls | paste -d" " -
.Ed
.It Sy Example 2 No Listing a directory in four columns
.Bd -literal
    $ ls | paste - - - -
.Ed
.It Sy Example 3 No Combining pairs of lines from a file into single lines
.Bd -literal
    $ paste -s -d"\\t\\n" file
.Ed
.El
.Sh ENVIRONMENT VARIABLES
See
.Xr environ 5
for descriptions of the following environment variables
that affect the execution of
.Nm :
.Ev LANG ,
.Ev LC_ALL ,
.Ev LC_CTYPE ,
.Ev LC_MESSAGES ,
and
.Ev NLSPATH .
.Sh INTERFACE STABILITY
The command line interface of
.Nm
is
.Sy Committed .
The output of
.Nm
is
.Sy Committed .
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr cut 1 ,
.Xr grep 1 ,
.Xr pr 1 ,
.Xr attributes 5 ,
.Xr environ 5 ,
.Xr largefile 5 ,
.Xr standards 5
