.\" Copyright (c) 2008 Sun Microsystems, Inc. - All Rights Reserved.
.\" Copyright 1989 AT&T
.\" Portions Copyright (c) 1982-2007 AT&T Knowledge Ventures
.\" The contents of this file are subject to the terms of the Common
.\" Development and Distribution License (the "License").  You may not use this
.\" file except in compliance with the License. .\" You can obtain a copy of the
.\" license at usr/src/OPENSOLARIS.LICENSE or
.\" http://www.opensolaris.org/os/licensing.  See the License for the specific
.\" language governing permissions and limitations under the License. .\" When
.\" distributing Covered Code, include this CDDL HEADER in each file and include
.\" the License file at usr/src/OPENSOLARIS.LICENSE.  If applicable, add the
.\" following below this CDDL HEADER, with the fields enclosed by brackets "[]"
.\" replaced with your own identifying information: Portions Copyright [yyyy]
.\" [name of copyright owner]
.\"
.\" Portions Copyright 2021 OmniOS Community Edition (OmniOSce) Association.
.\"
.Dd Feb 9, 2021
.Dt PRINT 1
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm print
.Nd write arguments to standard output
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Nm
.Op Fl CRenrv
.Op Fl f Ar format
.Op Fl u Ar fd
.Op Ar string Ns ...
.Ss ksh93
.Nm
.Op Fl Repnrs
.Op Fl f Ar format
.Op Fl u Ar fd
.Op Ar string Ns ...
.Sh DESCRIPTION
By default,
.Nm
writes each string operand to standard output and appends a
.Dv NEWLINE
character.
.Pp
Unless, the
.Fl r ,
.Fl R ,
or
.Fl f
option is specified, each
.Sy \e
character in each string operand is processed specially as follows:
.Bl -tag -width Ds
.It Sy \ea
Alert character.
.It Sy \eb
Backspace character.
.It Sy \ec
Terminate output without appending
.Dv NEWLINE .
The remaining string operands are ignored.
.It Sy \eE
Escape character
.Po
.Dv ASCII
octal
.Sy 033
.Pc .
.It Sy \ef
.Dv FORM FEED
character.
.It Sy \en
.Dv NEWLINE
character.
.It Sy \et
.Dv TAB
character.
.It Sy \ev
Vertical
.Dv TAB
characer.
.It Sy \e\e
Backslash character.
.It Sy \e0x
The 8-bit character whose
.Dv ASCII
code is the 1-, 2-, or 3-digit octal number
.Em x .
.El
.Sh OPTIONS
The following options are supported:
.Bl -tag -width Ar
.It Fl e
Unless
.Fl f
is specified, process
.Sy \e
sequences in each string operand as described above.
This is the default behavior.
.Pp
If both
.Fl e
and
.Fl r
are specified, the last one specified is the one that is used.
.It Fl n
Do not append a
.Dv NEWLINE
character to the output.
.It Fl f Ar format
Write the string arguments using the format string
.Ar format
and do not append a
.Dv NEWLINE .
See
.Xr printf 1
for details on how to specify format.
.Pp
When the
.Fl f
option is specified and there are more string operands than format specifiers,
the format string is reprocessed from the beginning.
If there are fewer string operands than format specifiers, then outputting ends
at the first unneeded format specifier.
.It Fl r Ns \&, Fl R
Do not process
.Sy \e
sequences in each string operand as described above.
.It Fl u Ar fd
Write to file descriptor number
.Ar fd
instead of standard output.
The default value is
.It Fl v
Treat each string as a variable name and write the value in
.Em \&%B
format.
Cannot be used with
.Fl f .
.It Fl C
Treat each string as a variable name and write the value in
.Em \&%#B
format.
Cannot be used with
.Fl f .
.El
.Pp
The following additional options are supported by the
.Xr ksh93 1
built-in variant of this command:
.Bl -tag -width Ar
.It Fl p
Write to the current co-process instead of standard output.
.It Fl s
Write the output as an entry in the shell history file instead of standard
output.
.El
.Sh EXIT STATUS
The following exit values are returned:
.Bl -tag -width Ds
.It Sy 0
Successful completion.
.It Sy >0
Output file is not open for writing.
.El
.Sh INTERFACE STABILITY
The command line interface of
.Nm
is
.Sy Committed .
The output of
.Nm
is
.Sy Committed .
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr echo 1 ,
.Xr ksh93 1 ,
.Xr printf 1 ,
.Xr attributes 5
