.\"
.\" Sun Microsystems, Inc. gratefully acknowledges The Open Group for
.\" permission to reproduce portions of its copyrighted documentation.
.\" Original documentation from The Open Group can be obtained online at
.\" http://www.opengroup.org/bookstore/.
.\"
.\" The Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers and The Open
.\" Group, have given us permission to reprint portions of their
.\" documentation.
.\"
.\" In the following statement, the phrase ``this text'' refers to portions
.\" of the system documentation.
.\"
.\" Portions of this text are reprinted and reproduced in electronic form
.\" in the SunOS Reference Manual, from IEEE Std 1003.1, 2004 Edition,
.\" Standard for Information Technology -- Portable Operating System
.\" Interface (POSIX), The Open Group Base Specifications Issue 6,
.\" Copyright (C) 2001-2004 by the Institute of Electrical and Electronics
.\" Engineers, Inc and The Open Group.  In the event of any discrepancy
.\" between these versions and the original IEEE and The Open Group
.\" Standard, the original IEEE and The Open Group Standard is the referee
.\" document.  The original Standard can be obtained online at
.\" http://www.opengroup.org/unix/online.html.
.\"
.\" This notice shall appear on any product containing this material.
.\"
.\" The contents of this file are subject to the terms of the
.\" Common Development and Distribution License (the "License").
.\" You may not use this file except in compliance with the License.
.\"
.\" You can obtain a copy of the license at usr/src/OPENSOLARIS.LICENSE
.\" or http://www.opensolaris.org/os/licensing.
.\" See the License for the specific language governing permissions
.\" and limitations under the License.
.\"
.\" When distributing Covered Code, include this CDDL HEADER in each
.\" file and include the License file at usr/src/OPENSOLARIS.LICENSE.
.\" If applicable, add the following below this CDDL HEADER, with the
.\" fields enclosed by brackets "[]" replaced with your own identifying
.\" information: Portions Copyright [yyyy] [name of copyright owner]
.\"
.\"
.\" Copyright 1989 AT&T
.\" Copyright (c) 1992, X/Open Company Limited.  All Rights Reserved.
.\" Portions Copyright (c) 2007, Sun Microsystems, Inc. All Rights Reserved
.\" Portions Copyright 2021 OmniOS Community Edition (OmniOSce) Association.
.\"
.Dd Feb 9, 2021
.Dt TEE 1
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm tee
.Nd replicate the standard output
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Nm
.Op Fl ail
.Oo Ar file Oc Ns ...
.Sh DESCRIPTION
.Nm
copies standard input to standard output, making a copy in zero or more files.
.Nm
does not buffer its output by default
.Po but see the Fl l No option Pc .
The options determine if the specified files are overwritten or appended to.
If a write to a file fails,
.Nm
continues to write to other files although it exits with a non-zero
exit status.
.Ss ksh93
The
.Nm
built-in in
.Xr ksh93 1
is associated with the
.Pa /bin
and
.Pa /usr/bin
paths.
It is invoked when
.Nm
is executed without a pathname prefix and the pathname search finds a
.Pa /bin/tee
or
.Pa /usr/bin/tee
executable.
.Sh OPTIONS
The following options are supported:
.Bl -tag -width Ar
.It Fl a Ns \&, Fl \-append
Appends the output to the files rather than overwriting them.
.It Fl i Ns \&, Fl \-ignore-interrupts
Ignores
.Dv SIGINT
signal.
.It Fl l Ns \&, Fl \-linebuffer
Sets the standard output to be line buffered.
.El
.Sh OPERANDS
The following operands are supported:
.Bl -tag -width Ar
.It Ar file
A path name of an output file.
Processing of at least 13
.Ar file
operands is supported.
.El
.Sh EXIT STATUS
.Bl -tag -width Ds
.It Sy 0
All files copied successfully.
.It Sy >0
An error occurred.
.El
.Sh ENVIRONMENT VARIABLES
See
.Xr environ 5
for descriptions of the following environment variables
that affect the execution of
.Nm :
.Ev LANG ,
.Ev LC_ALL ,
.Ev LC_TYPE ,
.Ev LC_MESSAGES ,
.Ev LC_NUMERIC ,
and
.Ev NLSPATH .
.Sh INTERFACE STABILITY
The command line interface of
.Nm
is
.Sy Committed .
The output of
.Nm
is
.Sy Committed .
The
.Xr ksh93 1
built-in binding to
.Pa /bin
and
.Pa /usr/bin
is
.Sy Volatile .
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr cat 1 ,
.Xr ksh93 1 ,
.Xr attributes 5 ,
.Xr environ 5 ,
.Xr largefile 5 ,
.Xr standards 5
