.\"
.\" Sun Microsystems, Inc. gratefully acknowledges The Open Group for
.\" permission to reproduce portions of its copyrighted documentation.
.\" Original documentation from The Open Group can be obtained online at
.\" http://www.opengroup.org/bookstore/.
.\"
.\" The Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers and The Open
.\" Group, have given us permission to reprint portions of their
.\" documentation.
.\"
.\" In the following statement, the phrase ``this text'' refers to portions
.\" of the system documentation.
.\"
.\" Portions of this text are reprinted and reproduced in electronic form
.\" in the SunOS Reference Manual, from IEEE Std 1003.1, 2004 Edition,
.\" Standard for Information Technology -- Portable Operating System
.\" Interface (POSIX), The Open Group Base Specifications Issue 6,
.\" Copyright (C) 2001-2004 by the Institute of Electrical and Electronics
.\" Engineers, Inc and The Open Group.  In the event of any discrepancy
.\" between these versions and the original IEEE and The Open Group
.\" Standard, the original IEEE and The Open Group Standard is the referee
.\" document.  The original Standard can be obtained online at
.\" http://www.opengroup.org/unix/online.html.
.\"
.\" This notice shall appear on any product containing this material.
.\"
.\" The contents of this file are subject to the terms of the
.\" Common Development and Distribution License (the "License").
.\" You may not use this file except in compliance with the License.
.\"
.\" You can obtain a copy of the license at usr/src/OPENSOLARIS.LICENSE
.\" or http://www.opensolaris.org/os/licensing.
.\" See the License for the specific language governing permissions
.\" and limitations under the License.
.\"
.\" When distributing Covered Code, include this CDDL HEADER in each
.\" file and include the License file at usr/src/OPENSOLARIS.LICENSE.
.\" If applicable, add the following below this CDDL HEADER, with the
.\" fields enclosed by brackets "[]" replaced with your own identifying
.\" information: Portions Copyright [yyyy] [name of copyright owner]
.\"
.\"
.\" Copyright 1989 AT&T
.\" Copyright 1992, X/Open Company Limited All Rights Reserved
.\" Portions Copyright (c) 1982-2007 AT&T Knowledge Ventures
.\" Copyright (c) 2009, Sun Microsystems, Inc. All Rights Reserved
.\" Copyright 2021 OmniOS Community Edition (OmniOSce) Association.
.\"
.Dd June 25, 2021
.Dt TEST 1
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm test
.Nd evaluate condition(s)
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Nm /usr/bin/test Op Ar condition
.Nm \&[
.Oo Ar condition Oc Nm \&]
.Ss ksh93
.Nm
.Op Ar condition
.Nm \&[
.Oo Ar condition Oc Nm \&]
.Ss csh
.Nm
.Op Ar condition
.Nm \&[
.Oo Ar condition Oc Nm \&]
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The
.Nm
utility evaluates the
.Ar condition
and indicates the result of the evaluation by its exit status.
An exit status of zero indicates that the condition evaluated as true and an
exit status of 1 indicates that the condition evaluated as false.
.Pp
In the first form of the utility shown using the SYNOPSIS:
.Bd -ragged -offset Ds
.Nm Op Ar condition
.Ed
.Pp
the square brackets denote that
.Ar condition
is an optional operand and are not to be entered on the command line.
.Pp
In the second form of the utility shown using the SYNOPSIS:
.Bd -ragged -offset Ds
.Nm \&[
.Oo Ar condition Oc Nm \&]
.Ed
.Pp
the first open square bracket,
.Nm \&[ ,
is the required utility name.
.Ar condition
is optional, as denoted by the inner pair of square brackets.
The final close square bracket,
.Cm \&] ,
is a required operand.
.Pp
See
.Xr largefile 5
for the description of the behavior of
.Nm
when encountering files greater than or equal to 2 GiB (2^31 bytes).
.Pp
The
.Nm
and
.Nm \&[
utilities evaluate the condition
.Ar condition
and, if its value is true, set exit status to
.Sy 0 .
Otherwise, a non-zero
.Pq false
exit status is set.
.Nm
and
.Nm \&[
also set a non-zero exit status if there are no arguments.
When permissions are tested, the effective user ID of the process is used.
.Pp
All operators, flags, and brackets (brackets used as shown in the last SYNOPSIS
line) must be separate arguments to these commands.
Normally these arguments are separated by spaces.
.Sh OPERANDS
The primaries listed below with two elements of the form:
.Bd -ragged -offset Ds
.Fl primary_operator Ar primary_operand
.Ed
.Pp
are known as
.Sy unary primaries .
The primaries with three elements in either of the two forms:
.Bd -ragged -offset Ds
.Ar primary_operand Fl primary_operator Ar primary_operand
.Pp
.Ar primary_operand Cm primary_operator Ar primary_operand
.Ed
.Pp
are known as
.Sy binary primaries .
.Pp
If any file operands except for
.Fl h
and
.Fl L
primaries refer to symbolic links, the symbolic link is expanded and the test
is performed on the resulting file.
.Pp
If you test a file you own
.Po
the
.Fl r ,
.Fl w
or
.Fl x
tests
.Pc ,
but the permission tested does not have the
.Sy owner
bit set, a non-zero (false) exit status is returned even though the file can
have the
.Sy group
or
.Sy other
bit set for that permission.
.Pp
The
.Cm =
and
.Cm !=
primaries have a higher precedence than the unary primaries.
The
.Cm =
and
.Cm !=
primaries always expect arguments; therefore,
.Cm =
and
.Cm !=
cannot be used as an argument to the unary primaries.
The following primaries can be used to construct
.Ar condition :
.Bl -tag -width Ar
.It Fl a Ar file
True if
.Ar file
exists.
.It Fl b Ar file
True if
.Ar file
exists and is a block special file.
.It Fl c Ar file
True if
.Ar file
exists and is a character special file.
.It Fl d Ar file
True if
.Ar file
exists and is a directory.
.It Fl e Ar file
True if
.Ar file
exists.
.It Fl f Ar file
True if
.Ar file
exists and is a regular file.
The
.Sy csh
.Nm
and
.Nm \&[
built-ins return true if
.Ar file
exists and is not a directory.
.It Fl g Ar file
True if
.Ar file
exists and its set group
.Sy ID
flag is set.
.It Fl G
True if
.Ar file
exists and its group matches the effective group
.Sy ID
of this process.
.It Fl h Ar file
True if
.Ar file
exists and is a symbolic link.
.It Fl k Ar file
True if
.Ar file
exists and has its sticky bit set.
.It Fl L Ar file
True if
.Ar file
exists and is a symbolic link.
.It Fl n Ar string
True if the length of
.Ar string
is non-zero.
.It Fl o Ar option
True if option named
.Ar option
is on.
This option is not available in
.Sy csh .
.It Fl O Ar file
True if
.Ar file
exists and is owned by the effective user
.Sy ID
of this process.
.It Fl p Ar file
True if
.Ar file
is a named pipe
.Pq Sy FIFO .
.It Fl r Ar file
True if
.Ar file
exists and is readable.
.It Fl s Ar file
True if
.Ar file
exists and has a size greater than zero.
.It Fl S Ar file
True if
.Ar file
exists and is a socket.
.It Fl t Op Ar file_descriptor
True if the file whose file descriptor number is
.Ar file_descriptor
is open and is associated with a terminal.
If
.Ar file_descriptor
is not specified,
.Sy 1
is used as a default value.
.It Fl u Ar file
True if
.Ar file
exists and its set-user-ID flag is set.
.It Fl w Ar file
True if
.Ar file
exists and is writable.
True indicates only that the write flag is on.
.Ar file
is not writable on a read-only file system even if this test indicates true.
.It Fl x Ar file
True if
.Ar file
exists and is executable.
True indicates only that the execute flag is on.
If
.Ar file
is a directory, true indicates that
.Ar file
can be searched.
.It Fl z Ar string
True if the length of string
.Ar string
is zero.
.It Ar file1 Fl nt Ar file2
True if
.Ar file1
exists and is newer than
.Ar file2 .
.It Ar file1 Fl ot Ar file2
True if
.Ar file1
exists and is older than
.Ar file2 .
.It Ar file1 Fl ef Ar file2
True if
.Ar file1
and
.Ar file2
exist and refer to the same file.
.It Ar string
True if the string
.Ar string
is not the null string.
.It Ar string1 Cm = Ar string2
True if the strings
.Ar string1
and
.Ar string2
are identical.
.It Ar string1 Cm != Ar string2
True if the strings
.Ar string1
and
.Ar string2
are not identical.
.It Ar n1 Fl eq Ar n2
True if the numbers
.Ar n1
and
.Ar n2
are algebraically equal.
.It Ar n1 Fl ne Ar n2
True if the numbers
.Ar n1
and
.Ar n2
are not algebraically equal.
.It Ar n1 Fl gt Ar n2
True if the number
.Ar n1
is algebraically greater than the number
.Ar n2 .
.It Ar n1 Fl ge Ar n2
True if the number
.Ar n1
is algebraically greater than or equal to the
number
.Ar n2 .
.It Ar n1 Fl lt Ar n2
True if the number
.Ar n1
is algebraically less than the number
.Ar n2 .
.It Ar n1 Fl le Ar n2
True if the number
.Ar n1
is algebraically less than or equal to the number
.Ar n2 .
.El
.Pp
In the above expressions,
.Ar n1
and
.Ar n2
may be integer, floating point or floating-point constant (such as [+/-]Inf,
[+/-]NaN) in any format specified by C99/XPG6/SUS.
.Bl -tag -width Ar
.It Ar condition1 Fl a Ar condition2
True if both
.Ar condition1
and
.Ar condition2
are true.
The
.Fl a
binary primary is left associative and has higher precedence than the
.Fl o
binary primary.
.It Ar condition1 Fl o Ar condition2
True if either
.Ar condition1
or
.Ar condition2
is true.
The
.Fl o
binary primary is left associative.
.El
.Pp
These primaries can be combined with the following operators:
.Bl -tag -width Ar
.It Cm \&! Ar condition
True if
.Ar condition
is false.
.It Cm \&( Ar condition Cm \&)
True if condition is true.
The parentheses can be used to alter the normal precedence and associativity.
The parentheses are meaningful to the shell and therefore must be quoted.
.El
.Pp
The algorithm for determining the precedence of the operators and the return
value that is generated is based on the number of arguments presented to
.Nm .
.Po
However, when using the
.Nm \&[ Ns No ... Ns Cm \&]
form, the right-bracket final
argument is not counted in this algorithm
.Pc .
.Pp
In the following list,
.Sy $1 ,
.Sy $2 ,
.Sy $3
and
.Sy $4
represent the
arguments presented to
.Bl -tag -width Ar
.It 0 arguments :
Exit false (1).
.It 1 argument :
Exit true (0) if
.Sy $1
is not null.
Otherwise, exit false.
.It 2 arguments :
.Bl -bullet
.It
If
.Sy $1
is
.Sy \&! ,
exit true if
.Sy $2
is null, and false if
.Sy $2
is not null.
.It
If
.Sy $1
is a unary primary, exit true if the unary test is true, false if the unary
test is false.
.It
Otherwise, produce unspecified results.
.El
.It 3 arguments :
.Bl -bullet
.It
If
.Sy $2
is a binary primary, perform the binary test of
.Sy $1
and
.Sy $3 .
.It
If
.Sy $1
is
.Sy \&! ,
negate the two-argument test of
.Sy $2
and
.Sy $3 .
.It
Otherwise, produce unspecified results.
.El
.It 4 arguments :
.Bl -bullet
.It
If
.Sy $1
is
.Sy \&! ,
negate the three-argument test of
.Sy $2 ,
.Sy $3 ,
and
.Sy $4 .
.It
Otherwise, the results are unspecified.
.El
.El
.Sh EXIT STATUS
The following exit values are returned:
.Bl -tag -width Ds
.It Sy 0
.Ar condition
evaluated to true.
.It Sy 1
.Ar condition
evaluated to false or
.Ar condition
was missing.
.It Sy >1
An error occurred.
.El
.Sh USAGE
Scripts should be careful when dealing with user-supplied input that could be
confused with primaries and operators.
Unless the application writer knows all the cases that produce input to the
script, invocations like
.Bd -ragged -offset Ds
.Nm Do Ar $1 Dc Fl a Do Ar $2 Dc
.Ed
.Pp
should be written as
.Bd -ragged -offset Ds
.Nm Do Ar $1 Dc Sy \&&\&& Nm Do Ar $2 Dc
.Ed
.Pp
to avoid problems if a user supplied value such as
.Ar $1
set to
.Cm \&!
and
.Sy $2
set to the null string.
That is, in cases where maximal portability is of concern, replace
.Bd -ragged -offset Ds
.Nm Ar expr1 Fl a Ar expr2
.Ed
.Pp
with
.Bd -ragged -offset Ds
.Nm Ar expr1 Sy \&&\&& Nm Ar expr2
.Ed
.Pp
and replace
.Bd -ragged -offset Ds
.Nm Ar expr1 Fl o Ar expr2
.Ed
.Pp
with
.Bd -ragged -offset Ds
.Nm Ar expr1 Sy \&|\&| Nm Ar expr2
.Ed
.Pp
but notice that, in
.Nm ,
.Fl a
has
.Sy higher
precedence than
.Fl o ,
while
.Sy \&&\&&
and
.Sy \&|\&|
have
.Sy equal
precedence in the shell.
.Pp
Parentheses or braces can be used in the shell command language to effect
grouping.
.Pp
Parentheses must be escaped when using some shells, for example:
.Bd -ragged -offset Ds
.Nm test Cm \e( Ar expr1 Fl a Ar expr2 Cm \e) Fl o Ar expr3
.Ed
.Pp
This command is not always portable outside XSI-conformant systems.
The following form can be used instead:
.Bd -ragged -offset Ds
.Cm \&( Nm Ar expr1 Sy \&&\&& Nm Ar expr2 Cm \&) Sy \&|\&| Nm Ar expr3
.Ed
.Pp
The two commands:
.Pp
.Bl -item -offset Ds -compact
.It
.Nm test Do Ar $1 Dc
.It
.Nm test Cm \&! Do Ar $1 Dc
.El
.Pp
could not be used reliably on some historical systems.
Unexpected results would occur if such a
.Ar string
condition were used and
.Sy $1
expanded to
.Sy \&! ,
.Sy \&( ,
or a known unary primary.
Better constructs are, respectively,
.Pp
.Bl -item -offset Ds -compact
.It
.Nm test Fl n Do Ar $1 Dc
.It
.Nm test Fl z Do Ar $1 Dc
.El
.Pp
Historical systems have also been unreliable given the common construct:
.Bd -ragged -offset Ds
.Nm test Do Ar $response Dc Cm = Do Ar expected string Dc
.Ed
.Pp
One of the following is a more reliable form:
.Pp
.Bl -item -offset Ds -compact
.It
.Nm test Do Ar X$response Dc Cm = Do Ar Xexpected string Dc
.It
.Nm test Do Ar expected string Dc Cm = Do Ar $response Dc
.El
.Pp
The second form assumes that
.Ar expected string
could not be confused with any unary primary.
If
.Ar expected string
starts with
.Sy \(mi ,
.Sy \&( ,
.Sy \& !
or even
.Sy \&= ,
the first form should be used instead.
Using the preceding rules without the marked extensions, any of the three
comparison forms is reliable, given any input.
.Pq However, observe that the strings are quoted in all cases .
.Pp
Since the string comparison binary primaries
.Cm =
and
.Cm != ,
have a higher precedence than any unary primary in the >4 argument case,
unexpected results can occur if arguments are not properly prepared.
For example, in
.Bd -ragged -offset Ds
.Nm test Fl d Do Ar $1 Dc Fl o Fl d Do Ar $2 Dc
.Ed
.Pp
If
.Sy $1
evaluates to a possible directory name of
.Sy \&= ,
the first three arguments are considered a string comparison, which causes a
syntax error when the second
.Fl d
is encountered.
One of the following forms prevents this; the second is preferred:
.Pp
.Bl -item -offset Ds -compact
.It
.Nm
.Cm \e\&( Fl d Do Ar $1 Dc Cm \e\&) Fl o Cm \e\&( Fl d Do Ar $2 Dc Cm \e\&)
.It
.Nm Fl d Do Ar $1 Dc Sy \&|\&|
.Nm Fl d Do Ar $2 Dc
.El
.Pp
Also in the >4 argument case:
.Bd -ragged -offset Ds
.Nm test Do Ar $1 Dc Cm = Do Ar bat Dc Fl a Do Ar $2 Dc Cm = Do Ar ball Dc
.Ed
.Pp
Syntax errors occur if
.Sy $1
evaluates to
.Sy \&(
or
.Sy \&! .
One of the following forms prevents this; the third is preferred:
.Pp
.Bl -item -offset Ds -compact
.It
.Nm test Do Ar X$1 Dc Cm = Do Ar Xbat Dc Fl a Do Ar X$2 Dc Cm = Do Ar Xball Dc
.It
.Nm test Do Ar $1 Dc Cm = Do Ar bat Dc Sy \&&\&&
.Nm Do Ar $2 Dc Cm = Do Ar ball Dc
.It
.Nm test Do Ar X$1 Dc Cm = Do Ar Xbat Dc Sy \&&\&&
.Nm Do Ar X$2 Dc Cm = Do Ar Xball Dc
.El
.Sh EXAMPLES
.Ss Nm /usr/bin/test
.Bl -ohang
.It Sy Example 1 - No Using Nm /usr/bin/test
.Pp
Perform a
.Sy mkdir
if a directory does not exist:
.Bd -literal -offset Ds
test ! -d tempdir && mkdir tempdir
.Ed
.Pp
Wait for a file to become non-readable:
.Bd -literal -offset Ds
while test -r thefile; do
	sleep 30
done
echo '"thefile" is no longer readable'
.Ed
.Pp
Perform a command if the argument is one of three strings, using the open
bracket
.Pq Nm \&[
version of the
.Nm
command:
.Bd -literal -offset Ds
if [ "$1" = "pear" ] || [ "$1" = "grape" ] || [ "$1" = "apple" ]
then
	command
fi
.Ed
.El
.Ss "The test built-in"
.Bl -ohang
.It Sy Example 2 No - Using the ksh built-in
.Bd -literal -offset Ds
ZERO=0 ONE=1 TWO=2 ROOT=root
if [ $ONE -gt $ZERO ] && \e
    [ $TWO -eq 2 ] && \e
    grep -q $ROOT /etc/passwd; then
	echo "$ONE is greater than 0, $TWO equals 2, and $ROOT is" \e
	    "a user-name in the password file"
else
	echo "At least one of the three test conditions is false"
fi
.Ed
.El
.Ss "csh"
.Bl -ohang
.It Sy Example 3 No - Using the csh built-in
.Bd -literal -offset Ds
@ ZERO = 0; @ ONE = 1; @ TWO = 2;  set ROOT = root
grep $ROOT /etc/passwd >&1 /dev/null
    # discard output
    # $status must be tested for immediately following grep
if ( "$status" == "0" && $ONE > $ZERO && $TWO == 2 ) then
	echo "$ONE is greater than 0, $TWO equals 2, and $ROOT is" \e
	    "a user-name in the password file"
endif
.Ed
.El
.Sh ENVIRONMENT VARIABLES
See
.Xr environ 5
for descriptions of the following environment variables that affect the
execution of
.Nm :
.Ev LANG ,
.Ev LC_ALL ,
.Ev LC_CTYPE ,
.Ev LC_MESSAGES ,
and
.Ev NLSPATH .
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr csh 1 ,
.Xr ksh93 1 ,
.Xr test 1B ,
.Xr attributes 5 ,
.Xr environ 5 ,
.Xr largefile 5 ,
.Xr standards 5
.Sh INTERFACE STABILITY
The command line interface of
.Nm
is
.Sy Committed .
.Sh NOTES
.Ss XPG4 ksh93
Uses arithmetic expressions such as
.Bd -literal -offset Ds
$(( x > 3.1 ))
.Ed
.Pp
instead of
.Bd -literal -offset Ds
$ /usr/bin/test "$x" -gt 3.1
.Ed
.Pp
when comparing two floating-point variables or a constant and a floating-point
variable to prevent rounding errors (caused by the base16 to base10
transformation) to affect the result.
Additionally the built-in arithmetic
support in XPG4
.Sy ksh93
is significantly faster because it does not require the explicit transformation
to strings for each comparison.
