.\"
.\" Sun Microsystems, Inc. gratefully acknowledges The Open Group for
.\" permission to reproduce portions of its copyrighted documentation.
.\" Original documentation from The Open Group can be obtained online at
.\" http://www.opengroup.org/bookstore/.
.\"
.\" The Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers and The Open
.\" Group, have given us permission to reprint portions of their
.\" documentation.
.\"
.\" In the following statement, the phrase ``this text'' refers to portions
.\" of the system documentation.
.\"
.\" Portions of this text are reprinted and reproduced in electronic form
.\" in the SunOS Reference Manual, from IEEE Std 1003.1, 2004 Edition,
.\" Standard for Information Technology -- Portable Operating System
.\" Interface (POSIX), The Open Group Base Specifications Issue 6,
.\" Copyright (C) 2001-2004 by the Institute of Electrical and Electronics
.\" Engineers, Inc and The Open Group.  In the event of any discrepancy
.\" between these versions and the original IEEE and The Open Group
.\" Standard, the original IEEE and The Open Group Standard is the referee
.\" document.  The original Standard can be obtained online at
.\" http://www.opengroup.org/unix/online.html.
.\"
.\" This notice shall appear on any product containing this material.
.\"
.\" The contents of this file are subject to the terms of the
.\" Common Development and Distribution License (the "License").
.\" You may not use this file except in compliance with the License.
.\"
.\" You can obtain a copy of the license at usr/src/OPENSOLARIS.LICENSE
.\" or http://www.opensolaris.org/os/licensing.
.\" See the License for the specific language governing permissions
.\" and limitations under the License.
.\"
.\" When distributing Covered Code, include this CDDL HEADER in each
.\" file and include the License file at usr/src/OPENSOLARIS.LICENSE.
.\" If applicable, add the following below this CDDL HEADER, with the
.\" fields enclosed by brackets "[]" replaced with your own identifying
.\" information: Portions Copyright [yyyy] [name of copyright owner]
.\"
.\"
.\" Copyright 1989 AT&T
.\" Portions Copyright (c) 1992, X/Open Company Limited All Rights Reserved
.\" Portions Copyright (c) 1982-2007 AT&T Knowledge Ventures
.\" Copyright (c) 2008, Sun Microsystems, Inc. All Rights Reserved
.\" Portions Copyright 2021 OmniOS Community Edition (OmniOSce) Association.
.\"
.Dd Feb 9, 2021
.Dt WC 1
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm wc
.Nd display a count of lines, words and characters in a file
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Nm
.Op Fl c | Fl m | Fl C
.Op Fl lLNqw
.Oo Ar file Oc Ns ...
.Sh DESCRIPTION
.Nm
reads one or more input files and, by default, for each file writes a line
containing the number of NEWLINEs, words, and bytes contained in each file
followed by the file name to standard output in that order.
A word is defined to be a
.Sy non-zero
length string delimited by
.Xr isspace 3C
characters.
.Pp
If more than one file is specified,
.Nm
writes a total count for all of the named files with total written instead of
the file name.
.Pp
By default,
.Nm
writes all three counts.
Options can specified so that only certain counts are written.
The
.Fl c ,
.Fl C ,
and
.Fl m
options
are mutually exclusive.
.Pp
If no file is specified, or if the file is
.Sy - ,
.Nm
reads from standard input and no filename is written to standard output.
The start of the file is defined as the current offset.
.Sh OPTIONS
The following options are supported:
.Bl -tag -width Ar
.It Fl c Ns \&, Fl \-bytes Ns \&, Fl \-chars
List the byte counts.
.It Fl l Ns \&, Fl \-lines
List the line counts.
.It Fl L Ns \&, Fl \-longest-line Ns \&, Fl \-max-line-length
List the longest line length.
.It Fl m Ns \&, Fl C Ns \&, Fl \-multibyte-chars
List the character counts.
.It Fl N Ns \&, Fl \-utf8 Ns \&, Fl \--noutf8
For UTF-8 locales,
.Fl \--noutf8
disables UTF-8 optimisations and relies on the native
.Xr mbtowc 3 .
On by default;
.Fl N
is the same as specifying
.Fl \-noutf8 .
.It Fl q Ns \&, Fl \-quiet
Suppress invalid multi-byte character warnings.
.It Fl w Ns \&, Fl \-words
List the word counts.
.El
.Pp
If no option is specified, the default is
.Fl lwc
(counts lines, words, and bytes).
.Sh OPERANDS
The following operands are supported:
.Bl -tag -width Ar
.It Ar file
A path name of an input file.
If no
.Ar file
operands are specified, the standard input is used.
.El
.Sh EXIT STATUS
.Bl -tag -width Ds
.It Sy 0
All input files were successfully processed.
.It Sy >0
An error occurred.
.El
.Sh ENVIRONMENT VARIABLES
See
.Xr environ 5
for descriptions of the following environment variables
that affect the execution of
.Nm :
.Ev LANG ,
.Ev LC_ALL ,
.Ev LC_TYPE ,
.Ev LC_MESSAGES ,
and
.Ev NLSPATH .
.Sh INTERFACE STABILITY
The command line interface of
.Nm
is
.Sy Committed .
The output of
.Nm
is
.Sy Committed .
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr cksum 1 ,
.Xr ksh93 1 ,
.Xr mbtowc 3 ,
.Xr isspace 3C ,
.Xr iswalpha 3C ,
.Xr iswspace 3C ,
.Xr setlocale 3C ,
.Xr attributes 5 ,
.Xr environ 5 ,
.Xr largefile 5 ,
.Xr standards 5
