.\" The contents of this file are subject to the terms of the Common
.\" Development and Distribution License (the "License").  You may not use
.\" this file except in compliance with the License.
.\"
.\" You can obtain a copy of the license at usr/src/OPENSOLARIS.LICENSE or
.\" http://www.opensolaris.org/os/licensing.  See the License for the
.\" specific language governing permissions and limitations under the
.\" License.
.\"
.\" When distributing Covered Code, include this CDDL HEADER in each file
.\" and include the License file at usr/src/OPENSOLARIS.LICENSE.  If
.\" applicable, add the following below this CDDL HEADER, with the fields
.\" enclosed by brackets "[]" replaced with your own identifying
.\" information: Portions Copyright [yyyy] [name of copyright owner]
.\"
.\" Copyright (c) 2004, Sun Microsystems, Inc.  All Rights Reserved.
.\" Copyright 2022 OmniOS Community Edition (OmniOSce) Association.
.\"
.Dd March 7, 2022
.Dt LIBSECDB 3LIB
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm libsecdb
.Nd security attributes database library
.Sh LIBRARY
.Lb libsecdb
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.In secdb.h
.In user_attr.h
.In prof_attr.h
.In exec_attr.h
.In auth_attr.h
.Sh DESCRIPTION
Functions in this library provide routines for manipulation of security
attribute databases.
.Sh INTERFACES
The shared object
.Pa libsecdb.so.1
provides the public interfaces defined below.
See
.Xr Intro 3
for additional information on shared object interfaces.
.Bl -column -offset 4n chkauthattr_ucred chkauthattr_ucred chkauthattr_ucred
.It chkauthattr Ta chkauthattr_ucred Ta endauthattr
.It endexecattr Ta endprofattr Ta enduserattr
.It fgetuserattr Ta free_authattr Ta free_execattr
.It free_profattr Ta free_proflist Ta free_userattr
.It getauthattr Ta getauthnam Ta getexecattr
.It getexecprof Ta getexecuser Ta getprofattr
.It getproflist Ta getprofnam Ta getuserattr
.It getusernam Ta getuseruid Ta kva_match
.It match_execattr Ta setauthattr Ta setexecattr
.It setprofattr Ta setuserattr Ta
.El
.Sh FILES
.Bl -tag -width /lib/64/libsecdb.so.1
.It Pa /lib/libsecdb.so.1
shared object
.It Pa /lib/64/libsecdb.so.1
64-bit shared object
.El
.Sh MT-LEVEL
.Sy MT-Safe
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr Intro 3 ,
.Xr attributes 7
