.\"
.\" This file and its contents are supplied under the terms of the
.\" Common Development and Distribution License ("CDDL"), version 1.0.
.\" You may only use this file in accordance with the terms of version
.\" 1.0 of the CDDL.
.\"
.\" A full copy of the text of the CDDL should have accompanied this
.\" source.  A copy of the CDDL is also available via the Internet at
.\" http://www.illumos.org/license/CDDL.
.\"
.\"
.\" Copyright 2026 Oxide Computer Company
.\"
.Dd June 10, 2026
.Dt CLOSE_RANGE 2
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm close_range
.Nd close or modify a range of file descriptors
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.In unistd.h
.Ft int
.Fo close_range
.Fa "unsigned int low"
.Fa "unsigned int high"
.Fa "int flags"
.Fc
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The
.Nm
function acts on every open file descriptor of the calling process in
the inclusive range
.Fa low
to
.Fa high .
With a
.Fa flags
argument of zero, each such descriptor is closed, as if by
.Xr close 2 .
.Pp
The range may extend beyond the highest open file descriptor, and file
descriptors within the range that are not open are ignored; it is not
an error for the range to contain no open file descriptors at all.
A
.Fa high
value of
.Dv UINT_MAX
acts on every open file descriptor at or above
.Fa low .
.Pp
The following values may be bitwise-ORed together in the
.Fa flags
argument to modify the behaviour of the function:
.Bl -tag -width Dv
.It Dv CLOSE_RANGE_CLOEXEC
Rather than closing the file descriptors in the range, set the
.Dv FD_CLOEXEC
flag on each of them, causing them to be closed by any subsequent
.Xr exec 2 .
.It Dv CLOSE_RANGE_CLOFORK
Rather than closing the file descriptors in the range, set the
.Dv FD_CLOFORK
flag on each of them, causing them to not be inherited by any
subsequently created child process.
.El
.Pp
The descriptor flags are described further in
.Xr fcntl 2 .
.Pp
Errors encountered while closing individual file descriptors within the
range are ignored.
.Sh RETURN VALUES
Upon successful completion, the
.Nm
function returns
.Sy 0 .
Otherwise,
.Sy -1
is returned and
.Va errno
is set to indicate the error.
.Sh ERRORS
The
.Nm
function will fail if:
.Bl -tag -width Er
.It Er EINVAL
.Fa low
is greater than
.Fa high ,
or
.Fa flags
contains an unsupported value.
.El
.Sh INTERFACE STABILITY
.Sy Committed
.Sh MT-LEVEL
.Sy Async-Signal-Safe
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr close 2 ,
.Xr exec 2 ,
.Xr fcntl 2 ,
.Xr fork 2 ,
.Xr closefrom 3C
.Sh STANDARDS
The
.Fn close_range
function is not part of any current standard.
It is compatible with the interfaces of the same name found on
.Fx
and Linux.
