.\" Copyright (c) 2000, Sun Microsystems, Inc. All Rights Reserved.
.\" Copyright 2026 Oxide Computer Company
.\"
.\" The contents of this file are subject to the terms of the Common
.\" Development and Distribution License (the "License").  You may not use
.\" this file except in compliance with the License.
.\"
.\" You can obtain a copy of the license at usr/src/OPENSOLARIS.LICENSE or
.\" http://www.opensolaris.org/os/licensing.  See the License for the
.\" specific language governing permissions and limitations under the
.\" License.
.\"
.\" When distributing Covered Code, include this CDDL HEADER in each file
.\" and include the License file at usr/src/OPENSOLARIS.LICENSE.  If
.\" applicable, add the following below this CDDL HEADER, with the fields
.\" enclosed by brackets "[]" replaced with your own identifying
.\" information: Portions Copyright [yyyy] [name of copyright owner]
.\"
.Dd June 10, 2026
.Dt CLOSEFROM 3C
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm closefrom ,
.Nm fdwalk
.Nd close or iterate over open file descriptors
.Sh LIBRARY
.Lb libc
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.In stdlib.h
.Ft void
.Fo closefrom
.Fa "int lowfd"
.Fc
.Ft int
.Fo fdwalk
.Fa "int (*func)(void *, int)"
.Fa "void *cd"
.Fc
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The
.Fn closefrom
function closes all open file descriptors greater than or equal to
.Fa lowfd .
.Pp
The
.Fn fdwalk
function first makes a list of all currently open file descriptors.
Then for each file descriptor in the list, it calls the user-defined
function
.Fa func ,
passing it the pointer to the callback data,
.Fa cd ,
and the value of the file descriptor from the list,
.Fa fd .
The list is processed in file descriptor value order, lowest numeric
value first.
.Pp
If
.Fa func
returns a non-zero value, the iteration over the list is terminated and
.Fn fdwalk
returns the non-zero value returned by
.Fa func .
Otherwise,
.Fn fdwalk
returns 0 after having called
.Fa func
for every file descriptor in the list.
.Pp
The
.Fn fdwalk
function can be used for fine-grained control over the closing of file
descriptors, or for other purposes such as counting the number of open
files in the process.
.Sh RETURN VALUES
No return value is defined for
.Fn closefrom .
If closing any of the open file descriptors fails, the error is ignored
and the file descriptors whose close operation failed might remain open
on return from
.Fn closefrom .
.Pp
The
.Fn fdwalk
function returns the return value of the last call to the callback
function
.Fa func ,
or 0 if
.Fa func
is never called
.Pq no open files .
.Sh FILES
.Bl -tag -width /proc/self/fd
.It Pa /proc/self/fd
directory
.Pq list of open files ,
used by
.Fn fdwalk
.El
.Sh EXAMPLES
.Sy Example 1
Implementing
.Fn closefrom
in terms of
.Fn fdwalk .
.Pp
The equivalent of the
.Fn closefrom
function can be constructed using
.Fn fdwalk
as follows:
.Bd -literal -offset indent
static int
close_func(void *lowfdp, int fd)
{
	if (fd >= *(int *)lowfdp)
		(void) close(fd);
	return (0);
}

void
closefrom(int lowfd)
{
	(void) fdwalk(close_func, &lowfd);
}
.Ed
.Sh ERRORS
No errors are defined.
The
.Fn closefrom
and
.Fn fdwalk
functions do not set
.Va errno
but
.Va errno
can be set by
.Xr close 2
or by another function called by the callback function,
.Fa func .
.Sh INTERFACE STABILITY
.Sy Committed
.Sh MT-LEVEL
The
.Fn closefrom
function is
.Sy Async-Signal-Safe .
The
.Fn fdwalk
function is
.Sy Unsafe .
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr close 2 ,
.Xr close_range 2 ,
.Xr getrlimit 2 ,
.Xr proc 5 ,
.Xr attributes 7
.Sh CAVEATS
The act of closing all open file descriptors should be performed only as
the first action of a daemon process.
Closing file descriptors that are in use elsewhere in the current
process normally leads to disastrous results.
