'\" te
.\" Copyright 2007 Sun Microsystems, Inc. All Rights Reserved
.\" The contents of this file are subject to the terms of the Common Development and Distribution License (the "License").  You may not use this file except in compliance with the License.
.\" You can obtain a copy of the license at usr/src/OPENSOLARIS.LICENSE or http://www.opensolaris.org/os/licensing.  See the License for the specific language governing permissions and limitations under the License.
.\" When distributing Covered Code, include this CDDL HEADER in each file and include the License file at usr/src/OPENSOLARIS.LICENSE.  If applicable, add the following below this CDDL HEADER, with the fields enclosed by brackets "[]" replaced with your own identifying information: Portions Copyright [yyyy] [name of copyright owner]
.TH LIST_DEVICES 1 "Mar 6, 2017"
.SH NAME
list_devices \- list allocatable devices
.SH SYNOPSIS
.LP
.nf
\fBlist_devices\fR [\fB-s\fR] [\fB-U\fR \fIuid\fR] [\fB-z\fR \fIzonename\fR] [\fB-a\fR [\fB-w\fR]]
     \fB-l\fR | \fB-n\fR | \fB-u\fR [\fIdevice\fR] | [\fB-l\fR | \fB-n\fR | \fB-u\fR] \fB-c\fR \fIdev-class\fR
.fi

.LP
.nf
\fBlist_devices\fR [\fB-s\fR] \fB-d\fR \fIdev-type\fR
.fi

.SH DESCRIPTION
.LP
The \fBlist_devices\fR utility lists the allocatable devices in the system
according to specified qualifications.
.sp
.LP
The \fIdevice\fR and all device special files associated with the device are
listed. The device argument is optional and, if it is not present, all relevant
devices are listed. If \fIdev-class\fR is present, devices belonging to the
specified \fIdev-class\fR are listed. There is no default \fIdev-class\fR.
.SH OPTIONS
.LP
The following options are supported:
.sp
.ne 2
.na
\fB\fB-l\fR [\fB-c\fR \fIdev-class\fR | \fIdevice\fR]\fR
.ad
.RS 30n
Lists the pathnames of the device special files associated with the
\fIdevice\fR that are allocatable to the current process.
.sp
If \fIdev-class\fR is specified, lists only the files associated with all
devices of the specified device class.
.sp
If \fIdevice\fR is specified, lists only the files associated with the
specified device.
.RE

.sp
.ne 2
.na
\fB\fB-n\fR [\fB-c\fR \fIdev-class\fR | \fIdevice\fR]\fR
.ad
.RS 30n
Lists the pathnames of the device special files associated with the device that
are allocatable to the current process but are not currently allocated.
.sp
If \fIdev-class\fR is specified, lists only the files associated with all
devices of the specified device class.
.sp
If \fIdevice\fR is specified, lists only the files associated with the
specified device.
.RE

.sp
.ne 2
.na
\fB\fB-s\fR\fR
.ad
.RS 30n
Silent. Suppresses any diagnostic output.
.RE

.sp
.ne 2
.na
\fB\fB-u\fR [\fB-c\fR \fIdev-class\fR | \fIdevice\fR]\fR
.ad
.RS 30n
Lists the pathnames of device special files associated with the device that are
allocated to the owner of the current process.
.sp
If \fIdev-class\fR is specified, lists only the files associated with all
devices of the specified device class.
.sp
If \fIdevice\fR is specified, lists only the files associated with the
specified device.
.RE

.sp
.ne 2
.na
\fB\fB-U\fR \fIuid\fR\fR
.ad
.RS 30n
Uses the user \fBID\fR \fIuid\fR instead of the real user \fBID\fR of the
current process when performing the \fBlist_devices\fR operation. Only a user
with the \fBsolaris.device.revoke\fR authorization can use this option.
.RE

.SH EXAMPLES
.LP
Listing All Devices
.sp
.LP
The following example lists all devices available to the caller for allocation:

.sp
.in +2
.nf
% list_devices -l
device: audio type: audio \e
files: /dev/audio /dev/audioctl /dev/sound/0 /dev/sound/0ctl
.fi
.in -2
.sp

.SH EXIT STATUS
.LP
The following exit values are returned:
.sp
.ne 2
.na
\fB\fB0\fR\fR
.ad
.RS 15n
Successful completion.
.RE

.sp
.ne 2
.na
\fB\fB20\fR\fR
.ad
.RS 15n
No entry for the specified device.
.RE

.sp
.ne 2
.na
\fB\fIother value\fR\fR
.ad
.RS 15n
An error occurred.
.RE

.SH FILES
.LP
\fB/etc/security/device_allocate\fR
.sp
.LP
\fB/etc/security/device_maps\fR
.sp
.LP
\fB/etc/security/dev/*\fR
.sp
.LP
\fB/usr/security/lib/*\fR
.SH ATTRIBUTES
.LP
See \fBattributes\fR(5) for descriptions of the following attributes:
.sp

.sp
.TS
box;
c | c
l | l .
ATTRIBUTE TYPE	ATTRIBUTE VALUE
_
Interface Stability	See below.
.TE

.sp
.LP
The invocation is Uncommitted. The options are Uncommitted. The output from the
\fB-a\fR and \fB-w\fR options is Uncommitted. All other output is
Not-an-Interface.
.SH SEE ALSO
.LP
\fBallocate\fR(1), \fBdeallocate\fR(1), \fBdminfo\fR(8),
\fBmkdevalloc\fR(8), \fBmkdevmaps\fR(8), \fBdevice_allocate\fR(4),
\fBdevice_maps\fR(4), \fBattributes\fR(5)
.SH NOTES
.LP
\fB/etc/security/dev\fR, \fBmkdevalloc\fR(8), and \fBmkdevmaps\fR(8) might
not be supported in a future release of the Solaris Operating Environment.
