Community Organization
======================

Our community is organized similarly to FreeBSD's community.  There are
three groups of people in addition to the users.  From largest to smallest,
they are:

1. developers
2. committers
3. core team

Developers
----------

This is the largest of the groups.  Anyone can be a developer simply by
grabbing a copy of the source code and changing it.  Once a change is made,
the developer needs to send the change to a committer (see below) to get it
into the repository.

If a developer becomes a frequent contributor, the committers may invite him
to become a committer.

Committers
----------

Committers are frequent contributors that have permissions to commit to the
repository.  They tend to specialize in an area, where most of their
contributions occur.  While committers can commit small changes in their
area without review, they must get larger changes (or changes outside their
area of expertise) reviewed by other members of the community.  (Note:
getting a review is *never* a bad thing)  Committers are also responsible
for handling contributions submitted by the developers.  That is, giving
review feedback, and once done committing the change on behalf of the
developer.

Committers can nominate developers that have shown frequent, outstanding
contributions to become a committer.  The nomination TODO (do committers
vote? or is the nomination just sent to the core team?) and finally the core
team approves the nomination.

A committer that hasn't contributed in a year may lose the commit
privileges due to inactivity.

The current committers are:

* alhazred
* jeffpc
* lotheac
* tsoome

Core Team
---------

The core team is a small subset of the committers.  (TODO decide on the size,
something like 4-5 sounds reasonable)  The committers elect the core team
every two years.  The core team resolves conflicts between committers,
approves nominations for a new committer, removes committer access of
inactive committers, and sets the direction of the project as a whole.

Note that since the core team is elected by the committers, it is ultimately
the committers that are in charge of the project.

The current core team is made up of:

* TODO (we need to bootstrap this)
